---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# sIMPLY Smart

What is nothingness when digitalized? Metrics.

Let’s go back to the bootcamp coding school class. I couldn’t help but
wonder: ‘Really? Are we still here as users? Still only asked to share
and organize our metrics?’ I guess my experience of information breaking
me down made me wonder what needs to be built in its place. Let us first
break down the role of a web developer according to the given study
material.

A web developer is smart.[^13simplysmart_1] He writes semantic code and knows all the
HTML tags.[^13simplysmart_2] He works a lot. Forgets to take breaks. When his code is
broken, he likes to punish himself ever so slightly by not sleeping. One
week before the project’s deadline, he will work until four in the
morning every night. It has a strange effect on his skin, a condition he
likes to justify as a reaction to the seasons changing. In his sleep, he
often dreams of unresolved work-related issues. Sometimes he finds
solutions in them. He remembers these. He starts his morning by applying
solutions to the code, just to see if he was right in his dreams. He
agrees to be slightly addicted to being right. He needs this validation,
not only from his computer, but from people as well. He wants them to
say that he works *a lot*. In this way, he doesn’t have to say it
himself, and it gets easier for him to focus if they know that he’s
currently not available. That’s one of the reasons why he works *a lot*.
Average web developers dream of working remotely from Thailand; true web
developers dream of building their own software one day. In terms of
location, they like to stay in close proximity to their money.

If you’re on a path to become a web developer, this is what the bootcamp
coding school will encourage you to become. If you’re in a tricky
bureaucratic situation, just like I was, fears will guide you into
studying the material more closely, just as I did. But I was also lucky
one day, when the most skilled coder in the class told me that web
development is all about copy-pasting toward the client’s needs. She did
not study the material seriously, nor had any bureaucratic reasons to do
so. She was a self-taught web developer who made me wonder what I’d
choose to learn if I were to build my coding practice independently from
the educational model thrown at me as a form of introduction to the
field.

Getting insight into the tech industry taught me certain things I’ve
mentioned before: how the ‘true’ web developers featured in my courses
would, when hired by corporations or start-ups, mainly do the work of
infrastructure maintenance, and not the expected expression, innovation,
or experiment.

Let’s question what *smart* means in this case by looking at another
example: a young web developer.

In December 2020, I decided my Instagram feed needed more coding-related
content from aspiring web developers. After typing ‘web developer’ in my
search bar, the first account that popped up was that of a boy who,
according to his bio, *hacks sh\*t together*. At that precise moment, he
became my new protagonist.

According to the metrics, he had 37,7K followers. Tapping on the latest
image welcomed me to a very long scrolling session. As I was scrolling,
I studied the bits surrounding each post: dates of posting, the written
descriptions, hashtags, the camera’s angle, filters, and even some of
the comments. It seemed like a very eventful account.

I started investigating with my third eye—my editor’s eye. A new picture
was posted every three to six days. While indulging them, my first
impulse as a user was to subconsciously categorize them as minimalistic.
The saturated filter applied to these images added a spooky, cinematic
atmosphere to my new protagonist’s room. Nighttime shots gave me the
sense that there’s some *serious hacking* going on. And that it’s pretty
quiet. Most of the pictures showed my protagonist coding, checking their
phone, looking out of the window, stretching, standing, and relaxing in
front of their working station: a desk containing a laptop, a big
screen, a keyboard, a mouse, a plant, and only sometimes a robot toy
whose brand I couldn’t recognize. From time to time, an acoustic guitar
or electric bike seemingly broke the monotony of the repeated still
life. The room seemed to be the only context in which my protagonist
operated. In all of these images, the coder is never *not* present. In
all of these images, the coder is never *not* working.

Each image was accompanied by a sort of written motivational letter.
Some of these texts wished to reveal tips on how to become a successful
web developer in just three steps, while others described the
protagonist’s learning trajectory, listing the tools and technologies he
was currently teaching himself. He was keeping up with the modern
frameworks and rapid changes of the tech industry.

In one of his posts, posted just before the end of 2020, the protagonist
shared with his followers that his end goal of the year was to make his
web app completely bug-free. And as for 2021? He wanted to reach 100K
followers. Unsure of whether this was the content I was looking for, I
followed the account anyway. This might just be the push I never knew I
needed, I thought to myself.

My protagonist’s posts appearing on my feed made me curious about his
audience. I started reading the comments from his followers and fans:
besides fire emojis and multi-colored hearts, there were a lot of
desperate questions, urgently asking for more tips on how to become a
successful web developer. Tapping the names of his followers and
supporters revealed a niche of very similar accounts. In them, my
potentially new protagonists were posing next to their work stations,
writing comparable motivational quotes, and settling for similar
commodity comforts: a motorbike, a guitar, an ergonomic chair, an
overpriced yoga ball. All of these profiles had enormous amounts of
followers.

Unwilling to let my reflections end there, I decided to reach out to my
chosen protagonist. After introducing myself as a (senior)researcher on
*Working Trends*, I told him I was interested in hearing more about the
methods through which the production of work and the production of its
online representation merge together within the culture of influencers.
A young web developer seemed to be an ideal figure to base my study on.
*On a further note*, I told him, *I found you whilst looking for
motivation to wrap up my own coding projects in 2020*. Before asking
actual work-related questions, I wanted to know his age.

At the time of our conversation, he was almost eighteen. He told me that
his interest in the tech & programming field dates back to when he was
twelve. Passion led him to join a bootcamp school where senior
developers taught kids the basics of programming of both hardware and
software. In his further coding endeavors, he focused on deepening his
skills in HTML, CSS, and Javascript.[^13simplysmart_3] Learning faster than he had
anticipated made him lose interest in the ever-present, collective
learning through coding workshops, so he decided to build stuff from
home. Pure DIY energy of a self-taught coder, it was. Working solo from
home gave him the time and headspace to build his own web product,
which, according to him, worked the best for his specific needs.[^13simplysmart_4] It
sells in 135 different countries and, at the time we were chatting,
reached almost 40,000 users. User dependency made him upgrade the
product to a Premium version, which also made it possible for users to
support him in maintaining the service.[^13simplysmart_5] Working simultaneously at a
company and a charity, his long-term goal was to make his products
profitable enough to live off of them. He had been earning money since
he was sixteen, and continued to do so.

But how does he manage to maintain his IG account and a K amount of
followers next to such a huge amount of actual work? He told me that he
created his account back in the summer of 2017. Throughout 2018, the
number of followers grew exponentially, even without any IG tricks
(purchasing bots, hidden hashtags, follow for a follow back and
subsequently unfollowing, and so on). Although he tried, he never really
worked with sponsors. Instead, he spent chunks of time connecting with
the programming community, all the while posting consistently. The
digital maintenance of his IG account soon became a natural habit.

When I complimented that his bio ‘I hack sh\*t together/ I’m a web
developer & designer☝️’ sounds quite convincing to newbies like me, he
confessed that he actually invented the trend of presenting himself as a
young web developer at the age of fifteen. After writing ‘15-year-old
Web Developer’ in his bio, it didn’t take long before other 15-year-olds
picked up on this age claiming technique. However, he did not continue
editing the number while growing up: he didn’t find it that impressive
anymore to be a 17-year-old web developer. Not because he had aged
slightly, but because the tech & programming community grew insanely
fast in just a few years, meaning that even younger (plus way older)
generations joined continuously.

My next questions pushed him away: *Do you use any filters or physical
tools in the actual space to make the images appear to be in the same
light?* And if so, how much time do you spend on the post-production of
an image for an IG post? Is the repetition of style important to you?
And if so, could you please elaborate on why? Is posting every three to
six days your natural flow, next to your other work? From one of your
posts, I learned that you’re still in school and that it feels like a
joke to you compared to your other work. How do you organize the time to
do both? Do you work in the evenings, and do you have time to do
homework next to it? Being ‘successful’ in both fields (web-dev and IG)
makes me curious about which one you invest more time in, your IG
account or your work? Do you have a registered company? Feel free to
skip the following questions. Where do you find your clients? Do you
have accounts on various freelance platforms? What is your social life
like? Do you ever get tired? Would you consider hiring an assistant? Is
programming and managing your IG account something you see yourself
doing for a long time still? If you could give any advice to your
generation, what would it be? 

As if the algorithm could feel the death of our conversation, it started
populating my feed with fashionable web-development content such as
reels that hypothesized how programming languages would look and
behave if they were a (female) human. At some point, I started getting
content from 40-plus men sitting in front of their work stations, giving
the camera a thumbs-up, writing motivational descriptions and doing
exactly what the younger ones do. It was then that I realized why my
protagonist opted out of his own trend. When I clicked on one such
profile to check the number of followers, a similar K amount appeared.
It works either way, I thought to myself, and decided to train my
algorithm differently.

Both examples of a web developer make it obvious that the ultimate form
of any work is fashion.[^13simplysmart_6] Just *claim* to be a front-end web
developer. Claim to be a full stack web developer. Claim to be a
creative developer. Claim to be a UX designer. Claim to be an expert.
Claim to be a female web developer. Claim to be a creative coder. Claim
to be a web architect. Claim to be a web artist. Claim to be a critical
web developer. Claim to be a code writer. Claim to be Ania Kubów.
Whichever one you choose,‘you will be organized, you will be an
organism, you will articulate your body—otherwise you’re just
depraved.’— Sadie Plant, *Zeros and Ones*.

Is a web developer considered smart because of his dream to build a
software, his eagerness to learn new languages, his industry-compliant
nature, or his portfolio? All of these points depict the workload of
maintenance. Can a web developer be considered smart, simply because he
is bored of building the interfaces he taught the users to demand?[^13simplysmart_7]
In my opinion, a smart web developer knows how to take a (short *and*
long) break from coding, without a sense of guilt.

[^13simplysmart_1]: ‘For the mainstream thrust of anti-intellectualism, as it stands
    today, characterizes thinking itself as an elitist activity. And
    even if one were to get excited about leaving the contortions of
    mental effort behind, today’s anti-intellectualism makes no
    corollary call for us to return our fingers to blood and dirt, to
    discover orgiastic block, to become more autonomous in our ability
    to fulfill our basic, most primal needs, or to become one with the
    awe-inspiring forces of the cosmos.’ — Maggie Nelson, *The Art of
    Cruelty*

[^13simplysmart_2]: Writing clean code which describes the computer what each text
    component represents; i.e. titles are put in &lt;h1&gt;&lt;/h1&gt;
    tags.

[^13simplysmart_3]: Basic tools for building a website.

[^13simplysmart_4]: ‘I created one web app in particular, called YouTubeDLD, which (I
    like to claim) is world's best YouTube downloader on the market
    without ads, spam and limitations.’ — My protagonist

[^13simplysmart_5]: ‘I recently introduced the Premium version, which allows users to
    support and help me to maintain the service by giving them the
    ability to download higher quality using my own encoding algorithm.
    In theory this means you can download 4K videos in 4K quality (which
    YouTube itself even doesn't allow its users to do).’ — My
    protagonist

[^13simplysmart_6]: ‘We live in a world with multiple timescales, all moving
    simultaneously but at different speeds. Brand calls it the order of
    civilisation. Nature, or geological time, moves the slowest - like
    the skater in the middle of the pinwheel. This is the rate at which
    glaciers carve out canyons or species evolve gills and wings—over
    eons. On the next level is culture, such as that of the Chinese or
    the Jews—which lasts millennia. On the next concentric ring comes
    governance—the rather long-lasting systems of monarchies and
    republics. The next level is infrastructure—the roads and utilities
    those governments build and rebuild. Faster yet is commerce that
    occurs through that infrastructure. And finally, the outermost ring
    is that of fashion—the ever-changing styles and whims that keep the
    wheels of commerce fed.’ — *Present Shock*, Douglas Rushkoff
    referring to Stewart Brand’s book *The Clock of the Long Now*

[^13simplysmart_7]: ‘Personal content: I feel like they are considered 'smart' when
    they use a new partly unsupported experimental property that makes
    my 2015 computer burn through hell but then they place a popup
    telling me I don't deserve to get access to the content because I
    don't want to throw away my decently functioning computer) for a new
    one.’ — Unnamed Web Developer
