---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# female Freelancer

> *\*(falling action) Don’t doubt the subject’s feminism\**

If I do not become a corporation I will never beat the assholes to the
moon

If someone is to go to the moon let me sing you a love song

Let it be me

— Ariana Reines, *A Sand Book*, ‘The Long Love That In My Thought Doth
Harbor’

In 2021 I was very much flirting with the idea of building my own
software. When I shared my goal with Scott, he told me *Good luck*, then
eventually asked: If writing semantic code is not your cup of tea, then
why don’t you just stick to your writing practice instead?

My first answer to that question would be to point out the irony behind
it. After my fadeout from his studio, I seriously started answering his
question with an occasional pat on the shoulder whenever I reminded
myself of my software plan.

The only way out is through, I thought.[^17femalefreelancer_1] Compared to the lack of
choices with BlockSmith software, my own software would allow more
choice to the user—for that’s always the developer’s goal. Maybe in
collaboration with someone else’s brain, I’d figure out what kind of
software that would be.

Out of sheer excitement, I called Clara to see if she’d be interested in
sharing this dream and becoming a powerful female duo. Slow, poetic,
more creative, and, most of all: very capable.

This power woman image led me to believe that we could change the
classic reasons as to why everybody wants to hire a female web developer
right now, in tech corporations, companies, start-ups, educational
institutions, etc. (Slow, poetic, more creative, capable, and, most of
all: cheaper.)[^17femalefreelancer_2]

With a software by our side, Clara and I would improve the image of
female employability, expanding it into safer spaces where the female
developer can be her true self.

For example: art academies. Due to the well-known ego politics and
patriarchal power dynamics that must be urgently dealt with when
encountered, most academies don’t have time to find out what exactly
they want from the coding tutor they’re looking for. They just know
that, if they still want to be relevant and contemporary, they urgently
need one. Because of a general lack of discourse regarding web
development, it’s hard for these academies to recognize various
educational needs of the (art) practice. Their uncertainty puts them in
a position of not being able to take any risks, and often leads them to
play it safe, hiring the technically most skilled candidate who can fill
a gap, solve a problem, quick, fail-proof.

For example: in tech corporations and start-ups, where the teams consist
of mostly men, a female web developer enters the team as an added
‘light-energy’. Where the team’s goal is focused on the technical
progress, a female web developer injects the milestones with her
decorative, design touch. Most of the time, she does so in the tasks
related to the project’s documentation, presentation, and revision—the
process, not the finalization. This is the world we live in.

But, with software by our side, we (Clara and I) could put an end to
this kind of thinking. This, however, sounded too dreamy.

This power woman image threw me into the depths of identity politics
more than the basics of software development—which, truth be told, is
what got me excited about the plan in the first place. The burden of our
software, no matter how technologically crafted, would be its
representation cornering us in the thread that continues equal
positioning of women in the history of technology. It would also corner
us into celebrating the fact that women *invented* the classification
system; that men got recognition for it *before* women started doubting
whether it’s the best system; that even though women were the ones
entirely writing the programs that enabled machines to work, they were
kept on the sidelines (Do you remember the term ‘kilo-girl’—1.000 hours
of computing labor—in the 1940s? No? Look it up.)

I don’t want my main role in web development to be the constant
retelling of the history of women’s (dis)placement within technology, as
this is not *the only* way to build history. Yet for the sake of
commemorating those women who contributed to computing throughout the
history (1700s, a gap, then 1900s till present day), here is a full list
of these women worth remembering from a publication called *Computers at
Work*: Nicole Reine Lepaure (built a clock for astronomical
observations), Ada Lovelace (first computer programmer), Anna Winlock
(mapped the universe for 2 cents/hour, which was half a man’s pay back
then), Antonia Maury (improved the system of classification by
redesigning it), Annie Jump Cannon (developed a stellar classification
system: Harvard Classification Scheme),[^17femalefreelancer_3] Henrietta Swan Leavitt
(discovered galaxies beyond the Milky Way), Dorothy Vaughan (NACA’s
first black manager; self-taught in FORTRAN, prepared her staff for the
transition from human to machine computers), Mary Jackson (NASA’s first
black female engineer), Katherine Johnson, ENIAC (Kathleen McNulty Antonelli, Jean Jennings Bartik, Betty Snyder Holberton, Marlyn Wescoff Meltzer, Ruth Lichterman Teitelbaum, Frances Bilas Spence), Kathleen Booth, Grace Murray Hopper, Margaret Hamilton, Mary Kenneth Keller, Katie Bouman, and Donna Strickland.

Extending this list with Clara would end up proving that we’re competent
enough for the industry. Doing ‘average’ development would disqualify us
as developers; what’s more, we would have to be excellent just to get
recognized. We would have to become the stoic men.

The hardest thing about building software is deciding *what* to say, not
the act of saying it. More choice is never the answer to the question of
online freedom. As Douglas Rushkoff said: ‘The more choices we make (or
are forced to make) the more we believe our expectations will be met.
But in actual experience, our pursuit of choice has the effect of making
us less engaged, more obsessive, less free, and more controlled.’ More
beta-versions of choices lead to final choices offered by a new
software. We’re never *not* perceived as full of attention.[^17femalefreelancer_4] In the
potential failure of my software, new systems would emerge in its wake.

In all this confusion, what seemed to be an immense desire to build a
software became an immense desire to just be *materialised* *thought*.
Can I be Sadie Plant’s brain, or that of Guangyi Li, [Mindy
Seu](https://cyberfeminismindex.com/), [Nancy
Wu](https://a-website-is-a-room.net/)? Can I be this website,[^17femalefreelancer_5] Carlo
Rovelli’s whispers[^17femalefreelancer_6] in *Real Review\#11*, Ben Grosser’s Minus, the
digital minister Audrey Tang, or Maggie Nelson’s latest book, *On
Freedom*? But then I also know: I still want to continue writing code
for others.

The web development’s history, full of evidence on top of evidence, of
rights and wrongs about the way one can and should be allowed to code,
makes it hard to see coding as a craft for establishing a ground where
realistic ambitions between developers and users can be met. Only when a
developer is able to explain to their clients the technologies used, the
reasons behind using them, their effect, and how to engage with them,
can be seen to what extent realistic ambitions could be met. The
developer, then, is building in collaboration; not just with the aim to
solve a problem. Not all collaborations are problematic: this is what
Silvio Lorusso encourages us to do in his article ‘Code to Learn’.[^17femalefreelancer_7]
New bootcamp schools are popping up all over the place, new ones
arriving as soon as the old ones go bankrupt, while start-up companies
and corporations are increasing the demand for more developers. Yet no
matter how highly paid or desired these developers are made to feel,
there will always be a satisfying amount of workers or developers
*hating* their jobs, wishing for a better standard.

> *\*(the point) Is the point of the subject to empower users to also
> take control of the tools they*’*re using?\**

Were I to wrap up this book with a list of issues at stake, and another
one listing the coping strategies for said issues, I’d definitely start
from the main issue being the consequence of the tech industry’s
promises of global governance: user’s inability to not participate in
online activities from which data is extracted and accumulated. Imagine
how a user’s conscious choice to move through the online world, with
limited choice-making via the clicking of buttons, would reflect on
their online existence? Furthermore, on their online history of the
self? I do not know, but I’d like to start imagining. Plant knows what I
mean when she writes how ‘zero was always something very different from
the sign which has emerged from the West’s inability to deal with
anything which, like zero, is neither something in particular nor
nothing at all.’ — Sadie Plant, *Zeros and Ones*.

Reflecting on the current state of the internet, the production of
digital histories, the hands behind it that enact its unseen labor, as
well as the enabling of the users’ ‘superpowers’ while they’re on a hunt
for that cultural spark to connect with, has led me to realize that the
internet could be a space for feeling *offline*. Maggie Nelson, in her
book *The Art of Cruelty*, asked an all-round relevant question:
‘Perhaps more controversially still, given our inarguable complicity in
all kinds of systemic forms of global injustice: is there any space left
for not watching, not focusing, not keeping abreast of all the events
and atrocities unfolding in the world, as an ethically viable option?’

> *\*(rising action again) Hmm, but what does the subject want????\**

I want to be free (from feedback loops), and I want others to be free,
too. [^17femalefreelancer_8] Demanding freedom4all seems too naive here. The constraints
from which any urgency is born requires addressing its demands through
its relations to the neighboring factors (such as alienation, agency,
self-governance, survival, consumption, power, class) and which, I
believe, are only to be addressed by the body that feels trapped in its
own constraints. The disordered. Some grow wings in boxes; they adapt.

I can’t stop referring to Maggie Nelson. In *On Freedom*, she asks:
‘What if we don’t presume, however, that there is any bottom to our
desire, that it doesn’t lie in a black box at the bottom of the sea?
What if learning to notice our shifting drives, identities, curiosities,
disinterests, or aversions, be it over the course of an encounter or a
lifetime, is our truer calling?’

Were I to speak from a defined and more developed role (of a writer, web
developer, artist), would I dare to materialize these ambiguities I have
found within my own dubious relationships with these practices? In the
end, it really doesn’t matter if you’re a stoic man, a female web
developer or if you’ve developed your own software, what extravagant
move you make to inject yourself into tech history, if you’re into
coding, or part of a no-coding movement. What matters is how one chooses
to relate to information. Meaning is not *in* the ‘document’, but in
one’s relation *to* it.

In his book *In the Flow*, Boris Groys provokes a linguistic agency for
the human or user when he writes that ‘today we practice our dialogue
with the world primarily via the Internet. If we want to ask questions
to the world, we act as Internet users. And if we want to answer the
questions that the world asks us, we act as content providers.’ Thank
you for this, Groys. So, then. Let’s *think*.

What’s the point of making a website when you can start an Instagram
account instead? What’s the point of writing this book, in fact?
Although revealed late, the starting challenge was to try and answer
Scott’s question: *If writing semantic code is not your cup of tea, then
why don't you just stick to your writing practice?* But to not
necessarily answer it. Sorry not sorry, Scott.

If there’s one personal condition that this book tries to encover within
my own usership, it is that of personal liberation from the circles I
found harsh while dwelling on the internet. And that the amount of
knowledge I’ve gained from writing this book summarizes not only the
level of my commitment to the subject(s), but also the context I am
writing from: my social status, the gain and/ or lack of my freelance
gigs, my female ambiguity, my questionable convincing skills, plus the
fact that sometimes, when the world around me gets too loud, starving is
still my default defense mechanism.

\*fadeout\*

[^17femalefreelancer_1]: ‘When an uncontainable artist’s influence won’t go away, art
    history compromises by constructing hagiographies. At least that way
    the vision is contained. But you have to keep reminding yourself of
    the great dead artist’s situation. That he also had contemporaries.
    That thoughts are never thought alone.’ —Chris Kraus, *Aliens and
    Anorexia*

[^17femalefreelancer_2]: Hiring a female web developer gives a good image/face to the
    ecosystem where she’s been given a chance. She’s made to believe
    that she is the architect of her temple(exquisite), capable of being
    in control over her money, time, decisions, selfhood, and soul. And
    all of that shall tame her enough to not resist the aesthetic. But
    when she does, the aesthetic will either kick her out of its
    mechanism, or it will be adjusted by professionals to suit her.

[^17femalefreelancer_3]: Stars were organized into classes using seven letters: O, B, A, F,
    G, K, and M (abbreviation of Oh! Be a Fine Girl - Kiss Me!).

[^17femalefreelancer_4]: In *Bitch*, Elizabeth Wurtzel describes the men Amy Fisher was
    surrounded by: ‘It seems that whenever people deal with the world in
    binary oppositions, choosing one thing only because it negates
    another, they are inevitably startled by the discovery that the
    quest for something completely different has only given them more of
    the same.’

[^17femalefreelancer_5]: [*https://www.queeringthemap.com/*](https://www.queeringthemap.com/)

[^17femalefreelancer_6]: In the text, Rovelli structures the consistency of modern reality
    from a technical point of view, but also from a personal, poetic
    interiority. Through his model of reality, he claims that objects
    are temporary visual projections in the current construct of time.
    He distinguishes between, what I understand, a chunk of concrete
    information to nod to, and agreement through feeling. Rovelli states
    that modernity is long gone, exactly because of this complexity of
    understanding basic notions within the time that has become rich
    with content. There are multiple times: of the physicist, of a lover
    waiting for his love to arrive, of a young man dreaming about his
    future, of an industrialist planning economical strategies, and so
    on. These examples, in particular, touched me and made me think of
    attunement as an everyday exercise.

[^17femalefreelancer_7]: [*https://silviolorusso.com/publication/learn-to-code-vs-code-to-learn/*](https://silviolorusso.com/publication/learn-to-code-vs-code-to-learn/)

[^17femalefreelancer_8]: In the second episode (‘The Use and Abuse of Vegetational
    Concepts’) of *All Watched Over by the Machine’s of Loving Grace*,
    Adam Curtis explains cybernetics: ‘Cybernetics said that everything,
    from human brains to cities and even entire societies, could be seen
    as systems regulated and governed by feedback…it seemed to offer a
    new insight into how order is maintained in the world…Cybernetics
    saw human beings not as individuals in charge of their own destiny,
    but as components in systems…They were just nodes in networks,
    acting and resting to flows of information.’
