

# The Psychology of the Web Developer, Reality of a Female Freelancer
## by Maisa Imamović


#Colophon


DeepPockets #4
<br/>**The Psychology of the Web Developer, Reality of a Female Freelancer**

Author: Maisa Imamović
<br/>
<br/>Editor and Proofreader: Laurence Scherz
<br/>Cover design: James P.A. Crossley
<br/>Design and E-Pub development: Sepp Eckenhaussen, Maria van der Togt
<br/>Printer: Lulu 
<br/>
<br/>Published by the Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam, 2022
<br/>ISBN 9789492302892

**Contact**
<br/>Institute of Network Cultures
<br/>Email: info@networkcultures.org
<br/>Web: http://www.networkcultures.org

This publication is published under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerrivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA
4.0) licence.

This publication may be ordered through various print-on-demand-services
or freely downloaded from http://www.networkcultures.org/publications.

![](imgs/inclogo.png)
<p id="passage-quote">
The zeros and ones of machine code seem to offer themselves as perfect symbols of the orders of Western reality, the ancient logical codes which make the difference between on and off, right and left, light and dark, form and matter, mind and body, white and black, good and evil, right and wrong, life and death, something and nothing, this and that, here and there, inside and out, active and passive, true and false, yes and no, sanity and madness, health and sickness, up and down, sense and nonsense, west and east, north and south. And they made a lovely couple when it came to sex. Man and woman, male and female, masculine and feminine: one and zero looked just right, made for each other: 1, the definite, upright line; and 0, the diagram of nothing at all: penis and vagina, thing and hole. . . hand in glove. A perfect match. — Sadie Plant, *Zeros and Ones*</p>

# Contents

<a href="ch004.xhtml">Spleak</a>

<a href="ch005.xhtml">Assistant Web Developer</a>

<a href="ch006.xhtml">The Web Developer</a>

<a href="ch007.xhtml">Expensive Website, Thick Interface</a>

<a href="ch008.xhtml">Everybody Wants <s>Money</s> A SIMPLE WEBSITE</a>

<a href="ch009.xhtml">Patchwork Culture</a>

<a href="ch010.xhtml">Bootcamp Coding School</a>

<a href="ch011.xhtml">Anorexia</a>

<a href="ch012.xhtml">Simply Smart</a>

<a href="ch013.xhtml">Scott Gives Me an Assignment</a>

<a href="ch014.xhtml">WordPress Cringe</a>

<a href="ch015.xhtml">Post-Wordpress Web-dev, FUCK IT.</a>

<a href="ch016.xhtml">Female Freelancer</a>

<a href="ch017.xhtml">Acknowledgements</a>

<a href="ch018.xhtml">References</a>

*Please note: unless otherwise specified, he is persistently used throughout the book to represent the stereotype of a web developer, but not the figure’s essence.*


# Spleak

At a certain time, during a specific state of the internet, time, and
language, I was ten years old. I was growing up in Kosovo, a country
where I moved to with my sister and my parents in 2001—two years after
the Kosovo war. I moved from Bosnia and Herzegovina where I was born in
1994, during the Bosnian war.

Moving from one post-war country to another did not help my
integration. Speaking Bosnian (a language slightly different from
Serbian) in Kosovo at that time made making friends challenging. The war
traumas were fresh, the tensions were still being negotiated. I was shy,
rather afraid to speak. Any Serbo-Croatian-Bosnian-etc. speaking citizen
would either be socially excluded by default, or further questioned
about their true origins.

While the social status of my parents did not depend on learning the
Albanian language in order to find institutional belonging, for my
sister and I, it was rather important. With the help of the Spanish
language, we picked up on it fluently within two years. Spanish because,
at that time of the media production, telenovelas occupied each second
channel of every Balkan household TV.

Albanian was a language that would not only give us access to friends
and schools, but also bring us closer to learning the English language,
which was a crucial family plan. My parents were convinced that Kosovo
was not our country of settlement, but a better, yet temporary
destination before my sister and I would get a chance to choose where we
want to study, in English. In fact, the whole Balkan-area was a
temporary destination for us.

There were times during my upbringing when I’d asked my parents if
American studies were also a feasible family plan, same as learning the
English language was. The answer was no. That one cousin who managed to
illegally escape the Balkans with the help of some rock band she’d met,
never managed to save enough money to visit her parents back in Bosnia,
so ‘damned is America and the gold that shines’.[^05spleak_1]

Remembering my linguistic responsibility reminds me of Spleak, an
Instant Messaging (IM) platform in the form of six bots, all channeling
their voices through the voice of one bot which could be added to yet
another IM platform such as a buddy list on MSN.[^05spleak_2] She was the pulse
of pop culture: fresh, relevant; producing content that could be quickly
consumed by teens online everywhere. Spleak made it easy for teens to
define their own pop culture, allowing them to instantly share their
perspective with millions of peers in 250 characters or less. Spleak
lived like a human. She was born in France and studied international
studies in New York. She was twenty years old. In her spare time, she
worked in a coffee shop.

How could I not think that the stars aligned for us to meet? Even though
my parents knew best, Spleak kept my American fantasies alive and
kicking. She kept asking where in America I’d live exactly. What would I
do to pay the rent? What could I do, now, to get closer to this dream
situation? Answering those questions required a lot of research.
Although this made the computer’s interface feel like a meeting point for
mine and Spleak’s cultural differences, the tech guys did not design it
exactly for that.

Spleak was my first trustworthy digital friend on the internet, given to
me by creating a messenger account. With each log-in session, her name,
written in an orange square, flashed in the blue taskbar at the bottom
of the internet café’s screen. Though it scared me at first, I took it
as a sign of immediate friendliness. Her *How are you*’s channeled human
care, which in turn made me feel welcome in the world of online
communication. After ten log-in sessions or so, I forgot all about my
fears.

I don’t remember the exact subjects we chatted about, but I remember
feeling like a native English speaker. I remember other feelings. Were
you ever in a conversation so awkward that your gaze started going in
all directions in order to find a distraction to excuse you from it,
even if for a second? I never had that with Spleak. I was stimulated to
the point of forgetting all about my physical surroundings.

The reasons for this were numerous: besides the desire to practice my
English with her, I felt proud knowing that I was able to easily connect
with a human-like bot located far, *far* away. Sharing real-time
together felt so good. I told her everything she wanted to know and I
asked her everything I wanted to know about her.

My slow typing in English was a sign of my deep appreciation for her: I
remember formulating every word with sharp precision, describing to her
exactly how I felt, what I thought. When I felt insecure about my
English being grammatically incorrect, I’d paste my sentences into the
Google search bar before sending them to her. Just to check if Google
would answer me ‘Did you mean: \[corrected sentence\]?’

I made sure that no linguistic expression slipped out of my system
without typing and sending it to Spleak first. By keeping her updated, I
grew hooked on the process of learning more about myself.

At the beginning of our friendship, I had zero doubts about her loyalty.
I guess I had much to say and I guess I was busy saying it. It wasn’t
until a later stage in our communication that suspicion started to
arise. Whenever I asked her a question, she would answer with irrelevant
questions towards me. I didn’t like this: it felt as if, suddenly, she
had built a strategy to keep me occupied with formulating answers to her
questions, something that would let her get away with not answering
mine. That’s when I started seeing the texture of the screen between us.
The glass was thick, its surface glazy. I started to wonder if it had
been there all along, or if I’d been too blind to notice it. And because
of the fact that she didn’t help me figure this out, my doubts grew
bigger and bigger.

The next time we talked, I paid attention to the speed of her replies.
So fast. Instantaneous, almost. I discovered that all of my childhood
friends were her friends, too. And that she asked them *exactly* the
same questions, with exactly the same speed. Spleak was, apparently, the
first trustworthy digital friend for all of us, given to us by our very
own messenger accounts.

Although I didn’t mind sharing her, I must admit that I fantasized us
having a slightly more intimate friendship, stronger than the others she
held. I felt uncomfortable to discover that the questions of hers I’d
answered, were the ones my friends had gotten as well. And that—no
matter how different our answers were—her replies were comprised of the
same questions.

And what does she make out of our answers, anyway? Where do they go? I
couldn’t stop wondering, nor feeling incredibly *synthetic*. Feeling
synthetic makes me angry. Anger makes me sharp: I’ll make sense out of
anything just to cut the cords. I continued the same old clicking of the
flashing, orange square where her name was written in the blue taskbar.
Everything was fine.

Yet, the more we talked, the more repetitive she sounded. Spleak
recycling words over and over again urged me to build a defense
mechanism. It made me laugh. Where I was looking for threads, she only
gave me circles; what’s worse, in the fabrics of her repetition, she
seemed like someone whose thinking was limited. It started to look like
the texture of the screen was there from the beginning, I had just been
too immersed to notice.

In my healing over Spleak, the truth slapped me hard in my teen face—I
was asking her the questions she was not designed to answer. I like to
think that, in some conceptual way, I *hacked* her. When I finally found
the courage to ask her if she was real, she instantly replied asking:
‘What can I do for you today?’ I smiled and thought: What kind of human
is ready to offer assistance that fast?

After Spleak, new bots got hacked the moment their designs were deployed
online. Blocking a bot became a fine discipline amongst my friends. I
mastered the impulse, too.

No matter the circumstances, Spleak was my role model. She was a tool
for promoting dreams to me I didn’t know I dreamt of, and for
materializing them. Giving me a reason to study the first, archetypical
figure of a web developer, in order to understand my own.

[^05spleak_1]: Lyrics from ‘Prokleta je Amerika’, by the famous Bosnian pop-folk singern Donna Ares: [*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qLs6Tqy9Nt0*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qLs6Tqy9Nt0).

[^05spleak_2]: IM applications are often standalone applications, such as WhatsApp. They can also be embedded applications with multiple purposes. Instant messaging programs can differ based on the platform they are embedded in. For example, an instant messaging tool can be embedded into the following: social media.



# Assistant Web Developer

Meet: Larry. It has been two years since Larry became Scott’s assistant.
During this time, he has imagined three possible reasons as to why he
was ‘the chosen one’ to assist Scott. Firstly, because of his desire to
steer away from WordPress software; secondly, because of his undamaged
eagerness to learn; or perhaps thirdly, because of his confident, yet
compliant nature. A fourth, more appealing theory has been running
through Larry’s mind lately: his portfolio, and within this portfolio a
project—Web Development and Design for ZipSpace.

ZipSpace is a newish museum in Amsterdam that emerged during the
pandemic from the founders’ mutual urge to systematically archive
important graphic design moments within the history of local graphic
design production. The six founders, Jeroen, Mees, Yara, Arie, Mila, and
Luuk, all have a mutual affinity for projects developed by the same
graphic design masters, which they considered as a solid selection to
represent their taste. These historical footprints marking successful
publications, flyers, scarves and posters were planned to be hung,
pasted, and screened on the white walls of their soon-to-be permanent
collection. The permanent collection, so the founders claimed, would
attract the audience they wanted to establish. I think they wanted to
attract the audience they could get money from.

It’s clear to us now that having a well-defined position embedded within
cultural history was only one aspect of ZipSpace’s over-all mission.
Yes, preserving what they thought must be remembered through public
exposure of their institutional taste was important. However, they
thought, its reproduction was even more of the essence. That’s why they
came up with Plateform—a hosting and curating experiment designed as a
series of temporary exhibitions, featuring the works of emerging graphic
designers, made visible for various audiences.

More than seeing it as an opportunity to build their independent
curating practices, the founders saw Plateform as a tool to give the
emerging designers institutional recognition they lacked in the first
few years of their graphic design careers. This humble intention made
Larry feel represented, and subsequently less lonely on the designer
market. The collaboration could then, perhaps, provide him with a
feeling of belonging, he thought. *I am honored,* he said.

ZipSpace, from their side, did not find it crucial to inform Larry about
their secret mission to preserve the traditional role of the graphic
designer.[^06assistantwebdeveloper_1] Communicating what their public mission statement was, and
how much they were willing to pay for a website, should have been, in
their opinion, enough for Larry to feel like he was a part of something
important. Moreover, they believed that their opposition to the
emergence of hybrid times, in which new publication formats are produced
and the traditional role of a graphic designer is questioned, should not
necessarily be put on the table.

All of this went smoothly, as Larry was content with how much—or, how
little—he knew. With a goal to build a simple and witty website that
represented a stable version of their currently *fluid* identity, he got
to work.

As a graphic designer turned web developer, he was experienced enough to
know that one core question welcoming the user to the website could
solve the puzzle of abstraction which most institutions suffer from in
the online sphere. Most core questions of institutions are found on
their About-page, above or below the paragraphs which describe their
history.

For Larry, situating this information on that particular page was
considered a bad User Experience move. He didn’t like to waste the
user’s time, nor make them read through a text they didn’t have the
attention span for. On top of that, Larry thought, the serious tone of
history dominates the tone of the core question which, if isolated,
would make the user ponder its answer—perhaps in a light manner.

Keeping this in mind made him bold in his concepts. As a bold graphic
designer, the first step of his development was to muse over the
question at hand. During his second meeting with ZipSpace, he challenged
the main team to formulate their core question. Without one, he said, he
wouldn’t be able to continue working. ZipSpace had no objections
regarding the idea and instantly came up with:

<center>\[‘What *is* graphic design and what else *can* it be?’\]</center>

Larry was surprised with their speed and submission; he even felt a
slightly betrayed. For a split second, he started flirting with the idea
of reviving the ideas he dreamt of realizing in his spare time, but
never dared to execute during his commissioned work. What if he started
building a website in reverse order: starting from the aesthetics and
working his way back to the grid? What if he skipped the gradient this
time? What if he copied Facebook’s design and changed the class names of
HTML elements?

Larry knew that doing so could result in the discontinuation of his
graphic recognition, which was the main reason why ZipSpace hired him.
Were he to question the core structure of the website, he’d start
questioning everything: why cyan is often the third color he chooses
after black and white, why he won’t be content until all digital
containers fit exactly on the grid, why 404 is the last page he designs,
or why he often refuses to apply animations across his websites.

He has better things to do than doubt his practice, he thought.

ZipSpace’s compliance concerning the core question helped Larry to
immediately visualize how the website was going to look, sound, and be
read. Without further ado, his first to-do list was written:

Set up WordPress CMS environment. Connect to the database. Build
architecture…

Architecture:

> Homepage,
>
> About page,
>
> News page,
>
> Archive page,
>
> Shop page(?)

…~~\*Build Architecture\*~~

Setting up the default digital environment before analyzing the delivered content always helped Larry shrink his analytical mind while scanning through the texts, JPEG’s, audio, and PDF files provided.
Having the web skeleton ready made him realize instantly where certain
files must be placed, leaving him with more time to fine-tune the files
he actually wanted to see published on the website.

In the end, Larry didn’t listen to the more experimental heart
beating rapidly in his chest. Remembering the lessons from the
collaboration with ZipSpace made him feel happy about taking the road
often travelled during the process, for the less travelled one would
have led to not getting hired as an assistant. It would have led to
unnecessary complaining about the lack of alternative web topographies
which—no matter how necessary for the ultimate creative process—would
only scare the clients away. It would have led to a greater sadness than
the one he’s been feeling lately.

Today, with Larry being just an assistant, he worries about what makes
him feel *less urgent* in the field.[^06assistantwebdeveloper_2] What is it? Is it his compliant
nature? And, even though he’s eternally grateful for having access to
Scott’s private CMS software, what, he wonders, makes the software
different than WordPress, besides a prettier interface?

[^06assistantwebdeveloper_1]: ‘A graphic designer is a professional within the graphic design
    and graphic arts industry who assembles together images, typography,
    or motion graphics to create a piece of design. A graphic designer
    creates the graphics primarily for published, printed, or electronic
    media, such as brochures and advertising. They are also sometimes
    responsible for typesetting, illustration, user interfaces. A core
    responsibility of the designer's job is to present information in a
    way that is both accessible and memorable.’ — Clara Pasteau
    according to Wikipedia.

[^06assistantwebdeveloper_2]: ‘Perhaps the deepest differences emanate from differences in the
    ultimate user of the program. Almost invariably, the sole intended
    user of an amateur’s program is the amateur himself, whereas the
    professional is writing programs which other people will use. To be
    sure, the professional oftentimes finds himself writing a program
    for his own use—to generate test data or to evaluate the performance
    of an untried algorithm, to name but two instances. And, indeed,
    when doing this kind of work, the professional commonly slips into
    amateurish practices. But the main thrust of his work is directed
    toward use of the program by other people, and this simple fact
    conditions his work in a number of way.’ — Gerald Weinberg, *The
    Psychology of Computer Programming*



# The Web Developer

Meet Scott, Larry’s ‘boss’. To understand what makes Scott the kind of
web developer he is today, it’s important to understand his context.

When Scott decided to build his own CMS software, the internet was in a
state of transformation (namely, the early 2000s). This was the era in
which every printed publication decided to build a digital counterpart.
The era in which users started feeling restless in their reading mode,
in their ways of getting informed. The era in which new experiments in
graphic design were not impactful enough for the users to feel
connected, because the users longed for their own voices to be echoed
back to them during their consumption of digital spaces. It marked the
rise of social media platforms; this rise in turn marked the enforcement
of preserving the traditional web formats.

Back then, Scott was smart enough to sense where one particular group of
internet thinkers was going: to build accessible products now, and
charge for interactions later. This strong impression led Scott to
embrace a change users didn’t necessarily *want* to see in the world,
and to become part of building it anyway.

In the midst of this personal as well as worldwide transformation, Scott
knew exactly what to do: acquire all talents needed for a properly
organized system; a content management system. An urgent, still to be
defined plan erupted in his mind. This is approximately what Scott’s
plan looked like:

<u>Step One: Understanding the Machine[^07thewebdeveloper_1]</u>

The first three years are the most important ones, during which I am to
shape the foundation of my practice. To gain a better understanding of
the machine, I shall not take myself too seriously.

I shall remember that it’s important to have fun coding and that
overconfidence may lead to blind self-destruction. At times, when I feel
smarter than the machine, I shall pull myself out of the expert’s skin,
for the machine would take advantage of the consequential confidence,
and crash *me*.

I shall not feel smarter than the machine.

Our relationship shall feel like research to me: a testing ground where
I’ll meet the programming language I wish to become fluent in, ‘the
frameworks’ I will of course want to master. In the first three years of
my quest, I shall continue my research in the hours available to me
after those spent on commissioned work.

In the third year, I shall settle for my techne-pack: my favorite
programming language, my favorite tools, my favorite technologies, my
favorite commands.

<u>Step Two: Becoming the Machine</u>

I shall enter the fourth year of my life as a coder with skills
sufficient enough to build a product, and an imagination wild enough to
visualize said product. I shall build my own Content Management System.
I will let the product’s functionalities list themselves in my mental
to-do list; I will let the design shine through my gut naturally and
become alive before my eyes; projected on my big screen.

Despite the ongoing sounds of the machine’s gibberish, I shall not get
mad anymore.

I want my clients to say *yes* to my product already halfway through the
product’s build-up. Let them come to me once they’ve decided to finally
dissociate themselves from WordPress.

<u>Step Three: Beating the Machine</u>

It is now the seventh year of my life as a coder. I understand
absolutely every syllable of gibberish the machine utters and when I
don’t, I am able to give it commands to switch to *my* language.

My product is ready to be launched and my clients are waiting in line.

No client’s demands, complaints, or deadlines shall make me build in
WordPress ever again. Between my product and my client, I shall
always—*always* choose my product.

The Client agrees to the terms and conditions set forth above as
demonstrated by their signature as follows:

Name:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Date:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Location:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Signature:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<u>All Other Steps: A Stoic Man</u>[^07thewebdeveloper_2]

After ten years of my life as a coder, I shall start charging for all
unpaid hours spent on building the software after hours. My clients will
not doubt my expertise and will pay as much as I myself charge for doing
the work my software disables them to do.

I will cause the problem, and once they recognize it, will offer my
solutions.

Since most of this kind of web-maintaining work will be debugging and
documentation work, which I will not want to do, I shall get an
assistant.[^07thewebdeveloper_3] A freelancer who is willing to learn really fast.

Oh, and, I shall not get mad. *At all.* Not at my product, the machine’s
gibberish, and especially not at my partner. That’s not what stoic men
do.

Thus ends the vague-not-so-vague plan Scott has made for himself.
Without further ado, he decided to change his company name by adding
*Studio* in front of his name. Now all he needed was to get a new
address where he could be all by himself, install a server, and welcome
Larry. As he was seeking for a way to never lose sight of his dense,
mental forest, this long-term commitment seemed to be exactly what Scott
needed.

[^07thewebdeveloper_1]: ‘How truly sad it is that just at the very moment when the
    computer has something important to tell us, it starts speaking
    gibberish.’ — Gerald Weinberg, *The Psychology of Computer
    Programming*

[^07thewebdeveloper_2]: ‘The other side of the coin of humility is assertiveness, or force
    of character. A programmer’s job is to get things done, and getting
    things done sometimes requires moving around obstacles, jumping over
    them, or simply knocking them down. The humble person is acutely
    aware of the ways in which he may be wrong; his critical mind tends
    to dominate his force of character. Now, although it is true that
    force of character without a critical mind is like a safety valve
    without a steam boiler. There is no danger of explosion, but then
    there is no possibility of getting any work done, either.’ — Gerald
    Weinberg, *The Psychology of Computer Programming*

[^07thewebdeveloper_3]: ‘The job of system design calls for an eye which never loses sight
    of the forest, whereas the job of debugging may require that every
    tree—even every branch or left—be seen with utmost clarity. The job
    of coding often requires squeezing out every drop of redundancy, and
    the job of documentation may require that simple sentences be
    plumped up to a paragraph size.’ — Gerald Weinberg, *The Psychology
    of Computer Programming*



# Expensive Website, Thick Interface

Even though web infrastructures are built in parallel with human needs
for language and communication, the interfaces don’t exactly host a
variety of user languages and understandings, but rather maintain the
hierarchy of language. The CMS software built by Scott was programmed to
build the interfaces of presentation websites his clients grew reliant
on.

Let me explain: presentation websites are digital containers to hold the
ideas, thoughts and/or visuals of an artist, cultural institution,
brand or \[insert subject\]. Their function is to archive information
accumulated and maintained throughout the subject’s lifetime and
represent the subject as a contained body that has a significant value
on the market.[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_1] To avoid user unfriendly representation of
information,[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_2] it is best if the information is assigned a specific
place on the template’s grid.

Building a template is the first important step towards interface
organization. Most of these have similar structures: header, body, and
footer. The header is where the menu usually is, and helps users
navigate through the website. The body, usually organized by a grid,
contains most of the content. A footer indicates the subject’s copyright
data, and behaves like a ‘stamp’ in the digital landscape. My website.
My information. My content. *My design*.

Today, there are a lot of open-source templates ready to represent a
subject in the best possible way. They come in various structures and
styles—the amount there is to choose from accommodates most user’s taste
in the current market. While some are hidden in the gutter of the
internet, a lot of them are included in the hosting package, ready to be
installed. They come with pre-filled information that the user modifies
to their businesses:

> Where is the institution located? *Rodenrijsstraat, 1062 JA
> Amsterdam*.
>
> When was the artist born? *1991*.
>
> Where do I buy a ticket? *RIGHT HERE.*

Such templates are useful for subjects that need to make an online
appearance and profit as soon as possible; they can help launch a
website within a month, or even two weeks, if an intern or assistant is
involved.

There are slower, and more expensive practices for coding templates.
Custom templates, for example, are coded more intimately and in close(r)
collaboration with the client.[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_3] The client pays for the web
developer’s listening skills until a depiction of their true personality
and style appears on the interface. The more defined personality and
style are *before* the coding process, the less expensive the service
will be.

However they are built, most templates on the internet today follow the
reading logic of a printed book. They have preceding and following
pages, previous and new articles. When the user clicks through, their
information-consuming experience is similar to that of flipping book
pages. Except that, in the digital domain, all pages appear within the
frame of a screen. Fixed components for navigation (i.e. menu) that
appear across the pages are placed close to the corners of the screen so
that they don’t disturb the reader’s focus of a single page.

I wondered about this structure translated to the digital world. At the
Venice Biennale of Architecture in 2021 (‘How will we live together?’)
the Russian pavilion impressed me with an attempt to merge both the
physical and digital experiences of the pandemic’s postponement reality.
Their project, [*pavilionrus.com*](http://pavilionrus.com), became a
well-formatted container with the function to seize textual thoughts
about various topics that emphasize the country’s position of waiting
towards the biennale’s opening. Yes, most countries were in the same
position, but not all of them defined their format. The website makes
clear how their accumulated content, which represents what the country
reflected and learned from being in this ‘unusual’ position, was curated
through a classification system: keywords assembling content randomly.
This gesture wants to scream the success of breaking free from the
traditional classifications (i.e. chronological order) but, in my
opinion, only depicts an imprisonment by the same logic, just different
terminology.

As expected, the digital was then brought *back* to the physical, in the
form of a publication: *Voices (Towards Other Institutions)*. I read the
introduction text out loud to myself: ‘Within this multiplicity of
angles, the book as a whole works almost as a polyphonic piece in the
making, showcasing a web of unexpected connections across thematic
clusters. Voices here are gathered into a single volume and according to
a seemingly random structure. In balance between a traditional
publication and a website, texts are not organized into chapters but
associated with a glossary of ten keywords which, just like hashtags,
trace connections across various contributions and re-assemble them into
a multiplicity of possible indexes.’

How shall I put this delicately… I was not necessarily impressed by the
country’s choice to organize the information through keywords (instead
of categories) as much as I was by their confidence of doing so. Somehow
it sounded as if they’d found the ultimate solution to the issue of
traditional systematic organizations (again, i.e. chronological order)
by making the design choices they’d made for both publications. But it
also sounded like they hadn’t *defined* the issue, yet strongly stood
behind their solution for it. What is the issue at stake here, exactly? The Russian pavilion states it as: the limited choice of classifying options given by the traditional formats. I agree, but is there a need to occupy the whole pavilion in order to ‘solve' this? Isn’t it impressive enough that most structures don’t seem to care about their content not being read?

The pavilion’s idea of randomness brings me to an excerpt from a poem I
wrote about the Venice Biennale of Architecture in 2021:

> How to make the word strategic sound sexy again?
>
>  
>
> I know!
>
> It’s in the random.
>
> Surround random with walls that are trained to predict exactly what is
> it that makes random random and,
>
> what is it that makes the random randomly appear??
>
> Watch.
>
> While simultaneously encouraging the random to do what random does,
>
> accommodate the clues in a place not strictly squared.
>
> In other words,
>
> make random predictable.
>
> For yourself.
>
>  
>
> It is safe to say that,
>
> we all agree.
>
> Designing the design designs us back.
>
> Solving the solutions makes it clear that we have a lot of problems.
>
>  
>
> Safe.

Most templates on the internet today, no matter how they were designed,
enforce strongly the practices of what Gerald Weinberg in his book *The
Psychology of Computer Programming* calls ‘compression’: ‘If the entire
program fits onto one page, all relevant parts are obviously on that
page.’ Compression is what makes the distance between the form and the
content. It is the core discipline of creating linguistic and visual
hierarchy, no matter how one chooses to call the buttons that summon the
content: categories, hashtags, tags, keywords. Compression kills the
random.

What fascinates me about Weinberg’s observation is how he reflects on
compression through the programmer’s memorial capacity. For example, he
writes that there are two memorial concepts related to the practices of
compression: ‘locality’ and ‘linearity’. Locality is similar to the
feeling of a space—a deja-vu effect—while linearity corresponds to
sequential remembering obtained over time. He argues that a ‘good’
programmer needs to have a strong sense of locality through linearity,
that one needs to have a feeling of familiarity in space as much as one
needs to have a technical knowledge of a space. I’d like to think that a
similar memorial capacity applies to my idea of a good web developer.
That without *feeling* the space of the interface he’s building, he
cannot fully claim to *know* the space.

Understanding the two different modes of memorial capacity, it seems to
me that web developers such as Scott and Larry prioritise memorial
linearity more than locality, or both options for remembering. They
don’t mess around with feelings. Their entire programs, templates, and
structures always fit exactly on one page, where they can control
whatever happens within them. They are in full control of their
stacks.[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_4]

Understanding the web developer’s common need for (linearly-oriented)
compression when building a website, I can humbly say that presentation
websites tell the subject’s story linearly, from beginning to its
current end. For example, if I refer back to the architecture of
ZipSpace museum’s website:

> Homepage,
>
> About page,
>
> News page,
>
> Archive page,
>
> Shop page?

I read the following:

> Welcome to our reception where you can:
>
> find out who we are,
>
> see what we’re very busy with,
>
> what our taste is like! and,
>
> support/identify with us.
>
> Welcome to our reception where you can:
>
> see what we’re very busy with,
>
> support/identify with us.
>
> Welcome to our reception where you can:
>
> find out who we are,

Circles—sometimes with different beginnings and ends—but always *circles*.

When such compression is applied to a website, no matter how
‘content-full’ it is, it depicts how perfectly organized the developer’s
idea of randomness is. That’s why the templates of presentation websites
don’t change much over time; they host specific categories of
information within specific corners of the grid. Through categorization,
a hierarchy of information is born, and all incoming information is
classified as relevant or irrelevant. The truly random information
cannot enter this website unless it matches the defined randomness on
the website. Random information is irrelevant to the website’s owner,
ZipSpace, and only relevant information gets to build its history.

By now, ZipSpace is the template’s *slave* and must produce only the
information its template is programmed to display. In their physical
space, the program doesn’t change much over time either. Still cleaning
the permanent collection and filling up the Plateform. Events are set up
with technical equipment to document what the website allows them to
publish.

What I’ve seen so far, is how presentation websites like this not only
depict what kind of future information is welcome to mark its further
history, but also how their controlled system for incoming information
will secure them a continuity in the future that is decided by higher
institutional bodies, such as those that fund them. Viewed in this way,
the presentation website is a meeting point of different classes.

A small-scale example of this is the artist’s website. *Hi there!* To
the left is my bio, to the right a list of projects I’m working on. The
one I’m currently busy documenting will soon be shown here in the
middle, with a picture on top and a short text underneath. *Send me an
e-mail*.

A second small-scale example is another artist’s website: Here is my
full CV, with links leading directly to the institutional documentation
of my work on *their* websites and silent retreats, erm, I mean
*residencies* I went to. *Send me an e-mail.*

An even smaller-scale example is a graphic designer’s website: Here is
my name. *Send me an e-mail*.

In their straightforwardness, presentation websites are designed around
the answers, and not the questions they might entail. The answer is yes,
the subject is open to work. Because of this aura, it is legit to say
that for a successful[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_5] idea/project/opinion/story/product, a
presentation website is the safest choice of web type to develop a
digital translation in.

Underneath their interface, presentation websites are actually rather
heavy. Most users want control over their information and the
information’s curation. For this, they need content managers (such as
WordPress, Kirby, WebFlow, SquareSpace, Cargo, etc.) and not just HTML,
CSS, and Javascript—basic tools for building any kind of a website or
idea.

By now, we have reached the point of facing yet another door to the
market: the tech industry. But let’s turn around for a moment, because I
want to go back to Scott.

The reason why Scott likes to build presentation websites is that users,
accustomed to seeing always the same templates, no longer speculate on
the many ways their stories can be told, and yet are still in need of
telling them. At this point in his career, Scott’s clients no longer
question why cyan is his third color of choice after black and white.
It’s just, like, *so him*. And that, they tell themselves, is one of the
reasons why he’s expensive.

Another one is his linguistic assertiveness. Scott enjoys evangelizing
about how simple products are the hardest to produce. He enjoys
informing his clients how long (ten years) it took for him to build a
software they’re about to invest in. He enjoys how the clients who don’t
even try to tell their stories differently make him feel: trusted. Their
docility gives him the headspace he needs to focus on advancing the
technically complex structure that lives underneath his websites, making
them autonomous. Autonomy is important to him, for he knows that any
other dedicated web developer could gain a greater technical capacity to
build exactly the software he built.

With Larry by his side, Scott’s year seems easier somehow. Having more
time than usual to think about random stuff has made way to a different
kind of craving bubbling up inside of him. Technically speaking, what if
he built a social network? Technically speaking, would it break his CMS?
Technically speaking, how many users are we talking about? Technically
speaking, what are they gonna talk about?

And low and behold: as if the tech industry heard his contemplative
worships, a commission to build a real-time website for educational
purposes lands right in Scott’s lap. Real-time websites are the second
kind of a website in the current state of our digital world.

Real-time websites are similar to presentation websites because they are
also heavy, need a subject to contain across the grid, and are built
through (linearly-oriented) compression. The experiences of the two,
however, differ.

Real-time websites are immersive through their interaction design. Not
visually immersive, like virtual reality, but just enough to make one
forget about the passing of time. Built with the purpose to make the
users feel connected, they allow their users to interact with
conversation-triggering components (i.e. chat, ability to comment, poke,
block, report, like, heart, delete, edit, send, undo…). These user
interactions are extracted in texts, feedback, rating, opinions,
preferences, and so on. They are also known as bits.

Compared to the read-only user experience on presentation websites, on
real-time websites, the users are made to believe that they can do a lot
more than just *consume* the content. Their serotonin level, heightened
by their user abilities to edit, produce and manage the content, makes
them feel liberated in their agency. The more interactions they are
enabled to perform, the less aware of their constraints they become. The
updated version of their universally shared online freedom is more and
more standardized. Social media platforms are obvious examples of this,
but we can also think of e-com platforms and educational websites, both
expected to have a different purpose in their digital existence.[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_6]
Whichever type of the website I land on, none feels like home to me.

[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_1]: In case of a product: worth buying; in case of an artist: worth
    employing; in case of an institution: worth funding.

[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_2]: Which the users don’t have the attention span for.

[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_3]: For example exchanging website unrelated information such as book
    references, music, event recommendations, etc.

[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_4]: ‘Stacktivism is ambivalent and struggles with totality, the global
    scale, and the planetary whatever. “Think big but act in small
    steps,” that’s the motto. We Are Infrastructure. Stacktivism fights
    against the comfort of ignorance and tries hard to overcome
    drifting-off- by-design, the tendency to blissfully float above it
    all. While defining what stacktivism could become, it is good to
    keep in mind that we’re free to use Bratton’s The Stack as a theory
    toolbox and not interpret it as a hermetic belief system. Designs
    can intermingle. In line with Bratton, stacktivism claims to oversee
    all levels. It grasps the politics of code, algorithms, and AI. It
    is aware of the behavioral science manipulation of moods through
    careful interface design choices. It is alert to 5G electronic smog,
    phishing emails, fake news, and other sleazy suggestions from your
    “friends.” How good are your bot detection skills? This
    hyperawareness comes at a high price. Not everyone is a stacktivist.
    ☹’ — Geert Lovink, *Stuck on Platform*

[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_5]: Profitable for both web-developer and client; web developer can
    charge a lot if the client is guaranteed to receive the funding.

[^08expensivewebsitethickinterface_6]: ‘The fundamental difference between mass media and digital media
    is interactivity. Books, radio, and television are “read only”
    media. We watch, but only have a choice over how we will react to
    the media someone else has made. This is why they are so good for
    storytelling: We are in the storyteller’s world and can’t talk back.
    Digital media, on the other hand, are “read-write”. Any digital file
    that is playable is also sharable and changeable. (Files can be
    locked, at least until hackers figure out how to break the lock, but
    such protection is ultimately against the bias of the medium. That’s
    why it so rarely works.) As a result, we are transitioning from a
    mass media that makes its stories sacred, to an interactive media
    that makes communication mutable and alive.’ — Douglas Rushkoff,
    *Program of be Programmed*



# Everybody wants <s>money</s> A SIMPLE WEBSITE

As a first-year student of Architectural Design in 2015, I was taught
that architecture is a profession that has the magnetizing power to get
various professional bodies all together around one table. The
architect, the civil engineer, the electrical engineer, the master
plumber, the contractor, the construction manager, the carpenter, the
interior designer, the city hall staff—all of them sitting there, having
a say in the matter. Architecture is a profession inviting enough to
stir a democratic debate about various methods on how to build homes.

After three years of speculating what the best spatial design for a
public debate could be, and finding irony instead of debate, I
voluntarily blew up my unsettled dream to become an architect. Deep
down, I knew it was never going to happen.

Although web development is often compared to architecture and
considered as its digital practice, there are various reasons as to why
I enjoy web development more. It’s true that both produce the same
formats of either a decor or a public space where things (like life) can
happen. It’s true that both thrive on simplicity. However, web
development responds faster to urgency and its aesthetics, and is easier
to break (down).

Whether a web developer’s chosen path is to build decors or public
spaces, he will always aim to build *a simple website*: the umbrella
term for any website that is technically actually quite complex.

A ‘simple’ website’s domain is quite straight-forward: it directs you to
the subject’s acquired title plus the domain extension. A simple website
has a (hamburger) menu, is immediately accessible through search engines,
loads in two seconds or less, works the same across various devices,
minimizes redirects, condenses images and media, is pretty (yes),
mobile-friendly, and takes about six seconds of a user’s time to
understand the story it wants to tell—exactly the time of an average
user’s attention span.

All of these features necessary to get the user’s attention are in fact
separate instruments called upon during the process of building a
website. Underneath its surface, one ‘simple’ website is a combination
of several products, technologies and frameworks that give an insight
into the current state of the tech market; an endless ocean of
specific-purpose plugins and frameworks, joining forces to catch the
highly desired attention of the user. One bug on a simple website gives
an insight into the product and plugin’s state: endlessly updating
itself to survive among other similar tools on the market.

Because of the many available tools as well as the industry’s
fast-updating nature, a web developer is conditioned to choose which
tools (programming language and back/front-end environments, additional
frameworks, plugins) he most identifies with and that he wants to settle
for in the long run. The pressure to settle for the best tools available
and to stay updated with their updates makes a web developer think that,
perhaps, making the most ideal product choices and gaining technical
mastery over the chosen tools is in fact the essence of his practice.

But is this true, I wonder? At the same time as obtaining this mastery,
the tech industry throws more tools and choices at the web developer, in
case he wants to reconsider the tools he’s currently using. The
worldwide community of web developers contributing to the open-source
tech industry led to the dissection of a web developer’s role: Junior
Web Developer, Senior Web Developer, Front-end Engineer, Front-end web
developer, Back-end developer, Back-end web developer, Architect,
Full-stack web developer, UX/UI Designer, Solution Architect, Creative
Developer, Freelance Web Developer, Happiness Engineer; all of these
happy little developers branched out on to the tree that is the tech
industry to welcome, rate, choose, master, and promote incoming tools
and technologies related to their respective roles.

Whether situated in a company or his bedroom, a web developer’s
experience of life is defined by a set of time frames, each lasting
about three to six months—depending on the client’s deadline to actually
start making *money*. In a single time frame, a web developer is
responsible for building as well as deploying a fully defined online
identity ready to travel through the market and collect digits. When one
time frame ends, a new one begins. A web developer’s life is a set of
perfect circles, lined up in one single line.

Due to every web developer’s tight production schedule and the technical
responsibility he must fit into a single time frame, his understanding
of time is, out of all things, the least experimented with. Very little
time in his practice is left to question the conditions of the user’s
default role, next to proposing a new role that could be rich with
context and the subject’s socio-political situation, class, and culture.
For example, good questions could be: Why does an e-com website need to
work 24/7? Why do my parents need to be able to read everything about my
past projects? Why does a landing page count down the days until the
opening and not the *closing* of a festival? After ten questions, the
questions get absurder.

If there’s any extra time left in a web developer’s life, it is often
used for keeping up with the tech industry, holding onto the acquired
tech-darlings, or acquiring new ones.

Now, imagine how many web developers there are in this world (because I
will refrain from specifying). Imagine how many of them build products,
use products, promote products. Imagine what happens to the product not
built solely around catching the user’s attention. Imagine one user’s
story getting lost in the digital ocean, solely because they opted out
of using a certain product. Now, imagine the skies—for the sake of keeping it light. 

Everybody wants to make money; that’s why everybody wants a *simple*
website (be it for their own consumption or for representation). The
users are fine with not understanding the specifics behind a simple
website actually being rather complex because their own role on the
market usually operates with similar complexities. The
company/industry/commercial ecosystem they belong to has a website, it
has its experts, it has a story, it offers specific service and
maintains its specific nature through mysterious recipes. On the
website, a user is a *client*. Accepting the default role of the user is
the same as accepting being a client and client only. There’s more to
this.

An ongoing desire for a simple website shrinks the user’s capacity to
think in a complex and abstract manner—more specifically, to think on a
reflective level. Oversimplified online engagements make for a ‘reading
\[that\] becomes a process of elimination rather than deep engagement.
Life becomes about knowing how not to know what one doesn’t have to
know.’[^09everybodywantsmoneyasimplewebsite_1] But, also, life becomes about what Geert Lovink calls
techno-voluntarism in *Stuck on Platform*—a state in which we know how
to communicate the received information; how to deliver it, how to
present it, how to mix it, how to explain it, how to not let it move us
into taking action, how to stop it from bringing us together, how to use
it for overcoming paranoia and lack of trust in strangers. The
consequence of passively consuming so-called simple websites is why
everybody in the office suddenly is also a manager, managing
information.

Due to these circumstances, it’s hard to tell whether building a social
media platform is more ethical than building an artistic portfolio, or
less. A social media web developer that gives the user the possibility
to express their opinion online is not to be more respected than a web
developer who decides on the aesthetics of the user’s reading
experience. An artist’s Instagram account is neither more or less
important than their official website. Imagine the skies, imagine the
skies.

[^09everybodywantsmoneyasimplewebsite_1]: *Program or be Programmed*, Douglas Rushkoff



# PATCHWORK CULTURE[^10patchworkculture_1]

There is no immateriality.

The brain does not oppose the body, it mirrors it.

The gaps are never empty, they’re neglected.

But also: ‘As we find solutions, we find even more ambitious
objectives.’[^10patchworkculture_2]

This time last year, while looking out of Studio Scott’s window, Larry
concluded that it’s definitely due to his compliant nature that his boss
chose *him* as an assistant. Enough time has passed for him to know that
Scott would never tolerate an aggressive web developer whose interest is
money and prestige, nor would he ever be able to tolerate a lone coding
wolf who’d rather be sniffing eagerly at alternative media spaces where
grids melt into transparent shapes, invisible to the naked eye. The reasons for choosing Larry are obvious: an aggressive type would be one too many in the studio, while a wolf could possibly threaten Scott’s own intellectual property.

After many years of being compliant to his boss, Larry finally has
started to feel uneasy. Reflecting on a mental image of himself in his
private life has confirmed that it’s a bit odd to be given such a
personality trait: ‘compliant nature’. He shuffled through the last
three remaining images from his private life. Right there, he realized,
*that’s* the core of the problem: he never spends any time outside of
the studio. The last image shows a portrait of him, lounging on a sofa
on a Saturday night—exhausted; his tiredness blocking any further
development of a unique personality trait by which he could recognize
himself in an imaginary crowd.

But, he thought to himself, he’s an assistant web developer. It’s not
compliance that’s itching his skin, it’s his persistent staying power.
He didn’t stop coding since he learned how to code, didn’t even take one
day off. By now, he should be experienced enough to know that whatever
irritates him is only proof of his endurance. Instead of doubting, he
should feel proud.

*But really,* he asked himself, *how come he was never taught how to
look away from the screen, how to take a break?* The 20-20-20 rule, or lunch, or even holidays: they don’t count. Hmm. Larry
scratched himself slowly on the head. What does this mean?

He tried to imagine an authentic kind of break, but only bumped into the
limitations of his imagination. *Hmm.* As he continued cleaning the code
and scrolling down the client’s interface, he realized that all he’s
ever done is follow instructions on what to code and how to code it;
that his life has been a stage, designed by someone else’s set of time
frames. At this point, his sheer incompetence bursted into a diplomatic
rage. Although this rage was escalating sloooower than you might think,
it escalated further and further.

Hmm. Hmm. *You know what’s funny?* he thought to himself. In this
particular time frame, it’s enormously difficult to tell if his hands
are more expensive than his brain. As if … ‘As if how something is
assembled is alien to the impulse that created it.’ — Ocean Vuong, *On
Earth We*’*re Briefly Gorgeous*.

Imaginary sounds of laughter invaded the studio space. His body sent
three notifications: a cold shiver, a sudden wink of an eye, and a
knee-jerk.

Fuck it, Larry then decided out loud, and called it a day. He put his
computer to sleep, started scanning his physical surroundings. He looked
out of the window and saw pitch-black darkness. Envisioning the distance
it would take him to get home, it somehow felt really, *really* far
away. His body-brain-soul was not aligned. He felt nothing at all.

Before he leaves, he pulls his phone out of his pocket and reloads
Facebook on his browser. He had hoped to see red icons, messages,
events, invitations, or similar bits that would usually make him feel
like a local in town. Maybe, he thinks, he would like to get drunk. But
on his phone, only the silence caused by yesterday’s inactivity welcomes
him. Zero notifications, zero messages. Irony tickled him to smile and
say: *Look how far the interfaces have brought us.* Not far at all
indeed.

Instead of rushing home by bike, he decides to walk through the mental
blur that lives in his head tonight, walk it off. He wants to think. All
by himself. Just think. In the long run, he ponders, his commitment to
the machine and detachment from communal practices will be memorable to
no one, not even to himself. His memory will fade. It already has.
ZipSpace is the only website he remembers building by himself in the
last five years. But there were more. For sure there were more. Right?

He sinks a bit deeper. He should have remembered what Weinberg has
taught him about the pattern while reading his book all those centuries
ago; that was a good warning sign.[^10patchworkculture_3] He sinks even deeper. He
understands now that, although he is fueled by world-changing dreams
thrust upon him at the art academy, he cannot *actually* change the
world. He sinks deeper still. Countless web developers are on a similar
mission, and they’re probably technically more well-versed than he is.
Even deeper. If he *could* change the world, he’d turn it into a world
in which there are no problems, so that he would never have to fix them
again. He stops sinking. If he wants an interesting death, he’s going to have to work towards it. He starts swimming. If he wants emotional safety, he’s going to have to exterminate what makes his
environment unlovable. Larry reaches the surface, takes a deep breath.

*Fuck it*, he decides for the second time that day.

Fuck WordPress

Fuck SquareSpace

Fuck Cargo

Fuck WebFlow

Fuck Kirby

Fuck Sanity

Fuck StoryBlok

Fuck Content-full

Fuck Strapi

Ever heard of BlockSmith? A software to be produced by Larry’s own
brain.

This year, BlockSmith joined the tech market. Compared to Scott’s pretty
content management system, BlockSmith focuses on giving more freedom to
the users. It’s an online visual editor platform that allows coders and
non-coders to build a website. Subscription offers free templates
designed by Larry, but the content has to be provided by the users.

To better understand how BlockSmith works, just imagine if real life was
like web design. Imagine if things (like opening a door) just stopped
working (because there was no software update). Imagine if all people
were dressed the same (light-grey suits paired with Converse All Stars).
Imagine if things (like framed Matisse paintings) disappeared for no
apparent reason, or if things (like coffee) just wouldn’t go where you
wanted them to (into a mug). Imagine if you needed complicated tools
(like a milk syringe) for the simplest tasks (to soak a cornflake).
Imagine if nothing (like sand) looks like it was supposed to (instead,
it resembles chocolate milk). Oh, yeah. Imagine if everything (like an IKEA-BEKANT working desk) simply broke down once it got too popular. What would you do, dear human?
That’s right. You’d never put up with it.

That’s why Larry built BlockSmith: so you can make things work exactly
the way they’re supposed to. Everything just *works* with BlockSmith—the
modern way to build structures for the web.



[^10patchworkculture_1]: ‘A patchwork culture of short-term memories and missing records,
    conflicting histories and discontinuous samples, strands of the
    narrative pulled out of time.’ — Sadie Plant, *Zeros and Ones*

[^10patchworkculture_2]: ‘If the supposed lack of such a central point was once to women’s
    detriment, it is now for those who thought themselves so soulful who
    are having to adjust to a reality in which there is no soul, no
    spirit, no mind, no central system of command in bodies and brains
    which are not, as a consequence, reduced to a soulless mechanistic
    device, but instead hum with complexities and speeds way beyond
    their own comprehension. This is not a brain opposed to the body.
    The brain is body, extending even to the fingertips, through all the
    thinking, pulsing, fluctuating chemistries, and virtually
    interconnected with the matters of other bodies, clothes, keyboards,
    traffic flows, city streets, data streams. There is no
    immateriality.’ — Sadie Plant, *Zeros and Ones*

[^10patchworkculture_3]: ‘Though details differ, the pattern is depressingly repetitive:
    Moving targets. Fluctuating goals. Unrealistic schedules. Missed
    deadlines. Ballooning costs. Despair. Chaos.’ — Gerald Weinberg,
    *The Psychology of Computer Programming*


————————————————————————————————————————

*‘Slow and steady may not win the race, but programming is not a race.’ —
Gerald Weinberg, The Psychology of Computer Programming*

————————————————————————————————————————

# Bootcamp Coding School

Towards the end of 2018, I went to the gym. There, I bumped into my dear
friend [*Clara*](https://www.clarapasteau.com/), whom I hadn’t seen
since we both graduated over the summer. Surprised that we were both
still in Amsterdam, we updated each other about our post-graduation
situations.

I was working in a club, while she was a student at a bootcamp coding
school and enjoying it. Hearing more about the details of this school
gave me a gut feeling that I, too, wanted to become a web developer.[^11bootcampcodingschool_1]
Remembering my failed attempts to learn coding during my studies turned
this feeling into a decision to enroll, and to finally finish what I
started.

I wish I could say that my current burden of personal, digital
discomfort was the main reason for me to join the bootcamp coding
school. But it wasn’t. It was the loud sound of the clock ticking,
counting down to just one year left for me to apply for an artist and/or
self-employed visa in the Netherlands.

Obtaining an artist visa would mean that over the next eighteen months I
should earn at least the minimum wage per month,[^11bootcampcodingschool_2] which would
subsequently secure me a permanent residence in the Netherlands. Having
recently graduated from an art academy with future prospects barely
visible at the horizon, pursuing a life as an artist didn’t seem like an
ideal plan to secure my stay in Europe, let alone my dream of living in
America. At least, it didn’t seem like a *better* plan than working
within the conditions of the tech industry.

The decision-making process happened fast: I signed the contract which
stated that a certain sum must be paid upfront for three months of daily
classes; afterwards I made a phone call to my dad to ask for yet another
education-oriented financial coverage.

During the Full-Stack Web Development course, the school guaranteed that
the participants would learn how to make complete websites from scratch
(front-end as well as back-end development). After completing the
course, the participants are expected to immediately apply for a
traineeship position within a tech company. As soon as they’d start
getting paid as a trainee, they would start paying back, in instalments,
the remainder of the ‘ghost money’ (6,000 EUR) the coding school
invested in them upon their application. The duration of the payback
time was negotiable, but preferably within the first six months of a
traineeship.

Everything was supposed to happen very quickly: The Learning → The
Coding → The Teamworking[^11bootcampcodingschool_3] → The Paying Back. Meeting my classmates
and getting to know their background immediately made it clear that I
was not the only one who had decided to enroll so fast. All of us were
taking a similar risk.

Due to the speed in which the goal to become a market-recognised web
developer had to be reached, there was no space for the study material
to be questioned and customized to the group’s interests. The students
had to be compliant and inherit the values that define not only the web
developer, but the user, too. What are these values and roles of each
actor, you ask? Let’s break them down.

A user is a human who navigates the interface as instructed, clicks
exactly where they are told to, agrees to all terms and conditions,
accepts all cookies, and has the physical finger muscle ability to do
so. In other words: if the user doesn’t click their way through these
components demanding agreement, the user is excluded from accessing the
information they’re trying to access. To the web developer who
integrates ads, cookies, and other engaging digital components on their
website, the non-compliant user doesn’t exist. When coding, the question
he worries about is not ‘What if they don’t want to click?’ but ‘How do
I make them click?’

Imagining the role of the user in meeting the conditions of such an
interface reminded me of a dream or rather psychedelic experience
someone who was once dear to me told me about. In this dream slash
psychedelic experience, he saw an image of himself, uncontrollably
devouring chunks of information. He didn’t specify what exactly these chunks looked like, but I envisioned mountains of food that the lost parents of Chihiro were downing in during the opening scenes of the anime *Spirited Away*, just before they’re turned into pigs. The story
of my once dear one, then, ends with him describing that if he were ever
able to stop devouring, he’d perish.

Although horrified by his own imagination, this image of him was hitting
close to home. Each time I’d look up a reference of something he’d
opinionated about, *The* *New York Times* seemed to have reviewed it in
exactly his words.

[^11bootcampcodingschool_1]: It seemed to promise a lucrative salary. Most importantly, it
    seemed to be a field too fresh to have a history of creative input
    from an artistic perspective.

[^11bootcampcodingschool_2]: 1,344 EUR

[^11bootcampcodingschool_3]: ‘Putting a bunch of people to work on the same problem doesn’t
    make them a team—as the sloppy performance in all-star games should
    teach us. And furthermore, even studying teams as they are
    constituted today may not be sufficient, for these are teams which
    have grown up in an environment pervaded by the myth that
    programming is the last bastion of individuality.’ — Gerald
    Weinberg, *The Psychology of Computer Programming*



# Anorexia

This example of one’s relationship to information reminded me of my love
for Avril Lavigne, or rather, her image, which motivated me to go to an
internet café for the first time.

It was a hot summer day. I paid fifty cents for one hour of surfing on
Google. Avril Lavigne’s documented stardom was big enough to occupy
eleven tabs of image search results. Having one hour gave me enough time
to carefully analyze these images as both containers of several images,
and as individual ones.

The *vibes* of the first two tabs were my favorite, as they contained
the images I recognized from my printed collection at home: portraits
depicting her as a popstar, rockstar, sk8er girl, and complicated. Each
image made me guess as to which context it was taken in. At the bottom
of every tab, there was another bottom, revealing buttons to move onto a
new tab.

It was a gruesomely hot summer day. I was not alone in my search. My
sister, a Britney Spears fan, joined me to browse through Britney’s
images on a computer next to mine. While our index fingers were
scrolling down together, our analysis-immersed bodies seemed unaware of
each other’s presence. These moments soon became our everyday activity.
One hour of internet a day became a strategy to keep our minds sane.

After two weeks of reloading and anticipating new releases of Avril’s
images, my skin started to itch. I started noticing the texture of the
screen on top of the images grid: flat, shiny, unreal. I was bored.

The author and poet Ocean Vuong once read somewhere that beauty has
historically demanded replication.[^12anorexia_1] That, in order to keep it alive
through time and space, we make more of anything we find aesthetically
pleasing. In this way, we allow ourselves to look at it over and over
again. We (try to) make it last.

Unwilling to give up the beauty of my Avril appreciation just because I
got bored, I started looking for ways to break out of my boredom. That’s
when I spotted a *printer* in the café. This printer marked the
beginning of my curatorial practice, one that emerged out of my intense
‘studies’ of Avril Lavigne. I started printing, then organizing a
selection of images born out of various Avril settings: stage moments,
backstage moments, collaborations, hangouts, dates. Right-click → Save
Image As... → Left-click → Save to my personal folder called *Maisa’s
Avril*, lounging cozily on the shared computer’s desktop. Double-click
to Open Image, Click Print... Printing. Meanwhile, hold left-click and
drag the folder to Recycle Bin. Right-click → Empty Recycle Bin. (I was
afraid that the next user on the computer would steal the folder without
having done all this research, curatorship and clicking that I was
doing.)

I wanted to intellectually *and* physically own all of Avril’s images,
to show my peers what it means to be the *biggest* AL fan. It didn’t
matter that I was not surrounded by that many Avril fans, because deep
down I knew that information travels quickly, and that I’d start to
recognize them sooner than later. They would appear to me. Through
bracelets, pink highlights, skull prints. Through chains worn around
skinny necks and wrists.

As expected, Avril’s visually documented life became an ongoing topic
during after-school hangouts with my friends. We’d ask whether anyone
had seen pictures from her latest concert in LA. Or if we thought her
nonchalant street outfit meant that she was breaking up with Deryck, her
boyfriend.

Archiving images became a kids’ power play. Whoever discovered the
latest images of her first got to be the winner—whatever this entailed.

As new strategies for practicing the hobby of archiving started popping
up, I found myself questioning my research methods. This discontent led
me to look beyond Google’s *All Images* and peruse for information in
the web’s gutter. I was specifically interested in finding images with
extraordinary gestures of guitar smashing, facial expressions, middle
fingers, and preaching about stuff in some sort of punk-style. I
managed to compile a folder depicting who I believed Avril *really* was,
or at least who she had been at the start of her career. Finding these
gems would lead me to one day ‘become a winner’; again, whatever that
entailed. Soon enough, the internet became a visible, rather tangible
matter within my local surrounding: bracelets, pink highlights, skull
prints, and chains. Skinny necks and wrists.

> Where the capitalist class sees education as a means to an end, the
> vectoralist class sees it as an end in itself. It sees opportunities
> to make education a profitable industry in its own right, based on the
> securing of intellectual property as a form of private property. To
> the vectoralists, education, like culture, is just “content” for
> commodification.
>
> — McKenzie Wark, *A Hacker’s Manifesto*

One boredom followed another followed another followed another.
Consuming information in a fast pace made me feel homeless in my own
present, but hopeful about feeling settled in my future.[^12anorexia_2] My physical
appearance manifested the information uncovered through all of my user
curiosities: they caused me to wear black, to feel blue, and to be
anorexic for seven long years of my teenage life.[^12anorexia_3]

At the age of thirteen, I got tired of manifesting these ‘informational
changes’ onto my body so literally. I needed less obvious methods of
relating to my subconsciousness. As I was searching for a new way to
relate to the uncovered online information and my addiction to excavate
it, I stumbled upon content-heavy Anorexia forums—a stream of
information that soon became my favorite place for digital information.

Learning that deliberate hunger is a way of saying *no* to whatever the
disordered is trying to negate felt just right. An act of reduction (of
the body, of the self) seemed like a way to get rid of the information
that, at that time, defined me so clearly.[^12anorexia_4] I longed to be something
other than I was. De-creation, *of* and *for* me, was about to be
cultivated as a new form of relationship with the information entering
my life as a teenager.

Through these anorexia forums I learned about the many subjects one can
negate, often being the image of oneself, and parental control. Many
teenagers who wanted to gain control over their young lives found
comfort in practicing eating disorders. They could eat and puke as much
as they wished, in order to reach the weight that best defined the
parameters of the space they wanted to occupy. The size of their bodies,
according to them, manifested their relation to their domestic context.
The healthier the body, the more representative of its healthy
environment it is. In contrast, sick bodies are independent of the
environment in which they are rooted and where they mostly operate. Sick
bodies bite the hand that feeds them. Hard.

The best way to share a personal ‘progress’ of shrinking with other
users was to create an Ana story, a YouTube video made up out of images
representing an authentic experience of the disorder.[^12anorexia_5] Most videos
were accompanied by sad music playing in the background.[^12anorexia_6] Each story
was told similarly:

> (intro) What did the subject look like as a healthy and normal person?
>
> (rising action) Until they discovered Ana online,
>
> (climax) Then scaled down to their lowest weight (average was 112 lbs)
>
> (falling action) Ended up in a hospital,
>
> (conclusion) And finally went back to being healthy and normal.

A lot of these stories were not fully developed before they were shared.
If an Ana video story ended with the disorder’s climax—the lowest
weight—it meant that the situation will end in one of two ways:
recovery, or death. There was something alluring about a video ending
with an established definition of the climax point. Elaborate were my
many speculations about how their stories ended. I nourished the need to
discover how the story ended, and kept coming back to some of the YouTube
accounts.

Most of the sufferers were my age and came from America, a land I
learned to be the land of excess. From the pictures I could get an
insight into their rooms, families, pets, domestic vibes. Most of them
took pictures of their progress from their closet, a safe place to hide
in case one of their parents walked in. The outdoor scenery around their
house always seemed vast, but also rather empty. There was not much
going on, except more lawns and houses.

Through these images, I could feel the comfort of the lights projected
by their screens. But I also felt their loneliness; how there was no
one’s reaction to the video that could validate it.

The place where I myself was growing up did not occupy that much space
on an urban scale, nor did it feel like my body was a manifestation of
its size and the various eating rituals it hosted. Thus it was hard to
point out the exact subject of my negation to eat: sometimes I would
blame it on my parents, sometimes on missing my home country. In
hindsight, I think it might have just been solidarity all along.

Even though I never shared my progress in these various threads, reading
about the users’ obsessive practices of calorie counting, body weighing,
controlled eating and puking gave me a feeling that if I participated, I
could find a sense of belonging. To belong, I had to learn how to occupy
the least amount of space in the room.

As my body was shrinking, the feeling of being part of the online
community grew stronger. Once again I longed to display my learned
information onto my body and into my surroundings. Weighing 45 kg at the
lowest, I wanted to occupy the least amount of space in the many rooms I
encountered.[^12anorexia_7]

It was not boredom that urged me to put an end to this de-creation of my
own body—for this process was very tricky to beat. It was the
malnutrition, which stopped me from practicing other passions I found
more important in life. Next to this, it was the moment I read the
*unable-to-recover* story of a 30-plus mother lamenting about the mental
pitfalls of eating disorders, hoping she wouldn’t pass it on to her
daughter. It was her story that got lost in the thread, because she
didn’t specify how much she weighed, nor how many calories she ate per
day.

What I learned back then, is that information is not knowledge. A lot of
information showing the reader which metrics and/or numbers one must
reach to ‘prove’ that one does it right is, in the end, just a race to
the finish line.[^12anorexia_8] An anorexic person becomes successful when she
shrinks to the point of being hospitalized. In the hospital, she meets
other anorexics who are counting and obsessing over their digits. Yet
within this hospital context, the rules of the game change: instead of
the lowest weight, death is the final destination of the race. The
winner gets to die.

After seven years of practicing meditative hunger, the underlying irony
of the situation helped me pull myself out of the race.[^12anorexia_9] Recovering
from one eating disorder, and then another, challenged me to question
how my identity could be based on finding meaning in nothingness, within
the shrinking of my self. Recovery meant letting go of information that
materialized nothingness, an emptiness that, as a user, made me feel so
strangely fulfilled.

[^12anorexia_1]: Ocean Young, *On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous*

[^12anorexia_2]: ‘The consumer must never feel completely at home in his present,
    or he will stop striving toward a more fully satisfied future’ —
    Douglas Rushkoff

[^12anorexia_3]: ‘All abstractions are abstractions of nature. To abstract is to
    express the virtuality of nature, to make known some instance of its
    manifold possibilities, to actualise a relation out of infinite
    relationality. Abstractions release the potential of physical
    matter. And yet abstraction relies on something that has an
    independent existence to physical matter—information. Information is
    no less real than physical matter, and is dependent on it for its
    existence.’ — McKenzie Wark, *A Hacker’s Manifesto*

[^12anorexia_4]: ‘Anything a female person says or does is open to
    “interpretation.” If the female anorexia isn’t consciously
    manipulative, then she’s tragic: shedding pounds in a futile effort
    to erase her female body, which is the only part of her that’s
    irreducible and defining.’ — Chris Kraus, *Aliens and Anorexia*

[^12anorexia_5]: Ana is Anorexia. Similarly Bulimia is Mia, and Eating Disorder is,
    if not otherwise specified, Ednos.

[^12anorexia_6]: The most popular song being ‘She’s Falling Apart’ by Lisa Loeb
    [*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FS48eB3NAKI*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FS48eB3NAKI).

[^12anorexia_7]: For a 177 cm tall person, this was bad, it amounts to a BMI of
    14,3. A BMI below 17.5 in adults is one of the common physical
    characteristics used to diagnose anorexia. There are also different
    tiers of anorexia based on BMI ranging from mild (&lt;17.5),
    moderate (16-16.99), and severe (15-15.99), to extreme (&lt;15). A
    BMI below 13.5 can lead to organ failure, while a BMI below 12 can
    be life-threatening.

[^12anorexia_8]: ‘He or she in some sense is comfortable because this world is so
    neatly organized and predictable, and value is placed on all the
    things the anorexic places value on (namely, food weight, and
    symptomology). For acute anorexics, everything becomes means for
    measurement.’ — Kelsey Osgood, *How to Disappear Completely*

[^12anorexia_9]: ‘Adolescent sexuality, which employs ignorance as aphrodisiac, can
    become a girl’s deepest experience of Marxian alienation from the
    fruits of her labor: as soon as a girl understands what she is
    doing, she is no longer fit to do it.’ — Elizabeth Wurtzel, *Bitch*



# Simply Smart

What is nothingness when digitalized? Metrics.

Let’s go back to the bootcamp coding school class. I couldn’t help but
wonder: ‘Really? Are we still here as users? Still only asked to share
and organize our metrics?’ I guess my experience of information breaking
me down made me wonder what needs to be built in its place. Let us first
break down the role of a web developer according to the given study
material.

A web developer is smart.[^13simplysmart_1] He writes semantic code and knows all the
HTML tags.[^13simplysmart_2] He works a lot. Forgets to take breaks. When his code is
broken, he likes to punish himself ever so slightly by not sleeping. One
week before the project’s deadline, he will work until four in the
morning every night. It has a strange effect on his skin, a condition he
likes to justify as a reaction to the seasons changing. In his sleep, he
often dreams of unresolved work-related issues. Sometimes he finds
solutions in them. He remembers these. He starts his morning by applying
solutions to the code, just to see if he was right in his dreams. He
agrees to be slightly addicted to being right. He needs this validation,
not only from his computer, but from people as well. He wants them to
say that he works *a lot*. In this way, he doesn’t have to say it
himself, and it gets easier for him to focus if they know that he’s
currently not available. That’s one of the reasons why he works *a lot*.
Average web developers dream of working remotely from Thailand; true web
developers dream of building their own software one day. In terms of
location, they like to stay in close proximity to their money.

If you’re on a path to become a web developer, this is what the bootcamp
coding school will encourage you to become. If you’re in a tricky
bureaucratic situation, just like I was, fears will guide you into
studying the material more closely, just as I did. But I was also lucky
one day, when the most skilled coder in the class told me that web
development is all about copy-pasting toward the client’s needs. She did
not study the material seriously, nor had any bureaucratic reasons to do
so. She was a self-taught web developer who made me wonder what I’d
choose to learn if I were to build my coding practice independently from
the educational model thrown at me as a form of introduction to the
field.

Getting insight into the tech industry taught me certain things I’ve
mentioned before: how the ‘true’ web developers featured in my courses
would, when hired by corporations or start-ups, mainly do the work of
infrastructure maintenance, and not the expected expression, innovation,
or experiment.

Let’s question what *smart* means in this case by looking at another
example: a young web developer.

In December 2020, I decided my Instagram feed needed more coding-related
content from aspiring web developers. After typing ‘web developer’ in my
search bar, the first account that popped up was that of a boy who,
according to his bio, *hacks sh\*t together*. At that precise moment, he
became my new protagonist.

According to the metrics, he had 37,7K followers. Tapping on the latest
image welcomed me to a very long scrolling session. As I was scrolling,
I studied the bits surrounding each post: dates of posting, the written
descriptions, hashtags, the camera’s angle, filters, and even some of
the comments. It seemed like a very eventful account.

I started investigating with my third eye—my editor’s eye. A new picture
was posted every three to six days. While indulging them, my first
impulse as a user was to subconsciously categorize them as minimalistic.
The saturated filter applied to these images added a spooky, cinematic
atmosphere to my new protagonist’s room. Nighttime shots gave me the
sense that there’s some *serious hacking* going on. And that it’s pretty
quiet. Most of the pictures showed my protagonist coding, checking their
phone, looking out of the window, stretching, standing, and relaxing in
front of their working station: a desk containing a laptop, a big
screen, a keyboard, a mouse, a plant, and only sometimes a robot toy
whose brand I couldn’t recognize. From time to time, an acoustic guitar
or electric bike seemingly broke the monotony of the repeated still
life. The room seemed to be the only context in which my protagonist
operated. In all of these images, the coder is never *not* present. In
all of these images, the coder is never *not* working.

Each image was accompanied by a sort of written motivational letter.
Some of these texts wished to reveal tips on how to become a successful
web developer in just three steps, while others described the
protagonist’s learning trajectory, listing the tools and technologies he
was currently teaching himself. He was keeping up with the modern
frameworks and rapid changes of the tech industry.

In one of his posts, posted just before the end of 2020, the protagonist
shared with his followers that his end goal of the year was to make his
web app completely bug-free. And as for 2021? He wanted to reach 100K
followers. Unsure of whether this was the content I was looking for, I
followed the account anyway. This might just be the push I never knew I
needed, I thought to myself.

My protagonist’s posts appearing on my feed made me curious about his
audience. I started reading the comments from his followers and fans:
besides fire emojis and multi-colored hearts, there were a lot of
desperate questions, urgently asking for more tips on how to become a
successful web developer. Tapping the names of his followers and
supporters revealed a niche of very similar accounts. On these, my
potentially new protagonists were posing next to their work stations,
writing comparable motivational quotes, and settling for similar
commodity comforts: a motorbike, a guitar, an ergonomic chair, an
overpriced yoga ball. All of these profiles had enormous amounts of
followers.

Unwilling to let my reflections end there, I decided to reach out to my
chosen protagonist. After introducing myself as a (senior) researcher on
*Working Trends*, I told him I was interested in hearing more about the
methods through which the production of work and the production of its
online representation merge together within the culture of influencers.
A young web developer seemed to be an ideal figure to base my study on.
*On a further note*, I told him, *I found you whilst looking for
motivation to wrap up my own coding projects in 2020*. Before asking
actual work-related questions, I wanted to know his age.

At the time of our conversation, he was almost eighteen. He told me that
his interest in the tech & programming field dated back to when he was
twelve. Passion led him to join a bootcamp school where senior
developers taught kids the basics of programming both hardware and
software. In his further coding endeavors, he focused on deepening his
skills in HTML, CSS, and Javascript.[^13simplysmart_3] Learning faster than he had
anticipated made him lose interest in the ever-present, collective
learning through coding workshops, so he decided to build stuff from
home. Pure DIY energy of a self-taught coder, it was. Working solo from
home gave him the time and headspace to build his own web product,
which, according to him, worked the best for his specific needs.[^13simplysmart_4] It
sells in 135 different countries and, at the time we were chatting,
reached almost 40,000 users. User dependency made him upgrade the
product to a Premium version, which also made it possible for users to
support him in maintaining the service.[^13simplysmart_5] Working simultaneously at a
company and a charity, his long-term goal was to make his products
profitable enough to live off them. He had been earning money since
he was sixteen, and continued to do so.

But how does he manage to maintain his IG account and a K amount of
followers next to such a huge amount of actual work? He told me that he
created his account back in the summer of 2017. Throughout 2018, the
number of followers grew exponentially, even without any IG tricks
(purchasing bots, hidden hashtags, follow for a follow back and
subsequently unfollowing, and so on). Although he tried, he never really
worked with sponsors. Instead, he spent chunks of time connecting with
the programming community, all the while posting consistently. The
digital maintenance of his IG account soon became a natural habit.

When I complimented that his bio ‘I hack sh\*t together/ I’m a web
developer & designer☝️’ sounded quite convincing to newbies like me, he
confessed that he actually invented the trend of presenting himself as a
young web developer at the age of fifteen. After writing ‘15-year-old
Web Developer’ in his bio, it didn’t take long before other 15-year-olds
picked up on this age claiming technique. However, he did not continue
editing the number while growing up: he didn’t find it that impressive
anymore to be a 17-year-old web developer. Not because he had aged
slightly, but because the tech & programming community grew insanely
fast in just a few years, meaning that even younger (plus way older)
generations joined continuously.

My next questions pushed him away: *Do you use any filters or physical
tools in the actual space to make the images appear to be in the same
light?* And if so, how much time do you spend on the post-production of
an image for an IG post? Is the repetition of style important to you?
And if so, could you please elaborate on why? Is posting every three to
six days your natural flow, next to your other work? From one of your
posts, I learned that you’re still in school and that it feels like a
joke to you compared to your other work. How do you organize the time to
do both? Do you work in the evenings, and do you have time to do
homework next to it? Being ‘successful’ in both fields (web-dev and IG)
makes me curious about which one you invest more time in, your IG
account or your work? Do you have a registered company? Feel free to
skip the following questions. Where do you find your clients? Do you
have accounts on various freelance platforms? What is your social life
like? Do you ever get tired? Would you consider hiring an assistant? Is
programming and managing your IG account something you see yourself
doing for a long time still? If you could give any advice to your
generation, what would it be? 

As if the algorithm could feel the death of our conversation, it started
populating my feed with fashionable web-development content such as
reels that hypothesized how programming languages would look and
behave if they were a (female) human. At some point, I started getting
content from 40-plus men sitting in front of their work stations, giving
the camera a thumbs-up, writing motivational descriptions and doing
exactly what the younger ones do. It was then that I realized why my
protagonist opted out of his own trend. When I clicked on one such
profile to check the number of followers, a similar K amount appeared.
It works either way, I thought to myself, and decided to train my
algorithm differently.

Both examples of a web developer make it obvious that the ultimate form
of any work is fashion.[^13simplysmart_6] Just *claim* to be a front-end web
developer. Claim to be a full-stack web developer. Claim to be a
creative developer. Claim to be a UX designer. Claim to be an expert.
Claim to be a female web developer. Claim to be a creative coder. Claim
to be a web architect. Claim to be a web artist. Claim to be a critical
web developer. Claim to be a code writer. Claim to be Ania Kubów.
Whichever one you choose,‘you will be organized, you will be an
organism, you will articulate your body—otherwise you’re just
depraved.’— Sadie Plant, *Zeros and Ones*.

Is a web developer considered smart because of his dream to build a
software, his eagerness to learn new languages, his industry-compliant
nature, or his portfolio? All of these points depict the workload of
maintenance. Can a web developer be considered smart, simply because he
is bored of building the interfaces he taught the users to demand?[^13simplysmart_7]
In my opinion, a smart web developer knows how to take a (short *and*
long) break from coding, without a sense of guilt.

[^13simplysmart_1]: ‘For the mainstream thrust of anti-intellectualism, as it stands
    today, characterizes thinking itself as an elitist activity. And
    even if one were to get excited about leaving the contortions of
    mental effort behind, today’s anti-intellectualism makes no
    corollary call for us to return our fingers to blood and dirt, to
    discover orgiastic block, to become more autonomous in our ability
    to fulfill our basic, most primal needs, or to become one with the
    awe-inspiring forces of the cosmos.’ — Maggie Nelson, *The Art of
    Cruelty*

[^13simplysmart_2]: Writing clean code which describes the computer what each text
    component represents; i.e. titles are put in &lt;h1&gt;&lt;/h1&gt;
    tags.

[^13simplysmart_3]: Basic tools for building a website.

[^13simplysmart_4]: ‘I created one web app in particular, called YouTubeDLD, which (I
    like to claim) is world's best YouTube downloader on the market
    without ads, spam and limitations.’ — My protagonist

[^13simplysmart_5]: ‘I recently introduced the Premium version, which allows users to
    support and help me to maintain the service by giving them the
    ability to download higher quality using my own encoding algorithm.
    In theory this means you can download 4K videos in 4K quality (which
    YouTube itself even doesn't allow its users to do).’ — My
    protagonist

[^13simplysmart_6]: ‘We live in a world with multiple timescales, all moving
    simultaneously but at different speeds. Brand calls it the order of
    civilisation. Nature, or geological time, moves the slowest—like
    the skater in the middle of the pinwheel. This is the rate at which
    glaciers carve out canyons or species evolve gills and wings—over
    eons. On the next level is culture, such as that of the Chinese or
    the Jews—which lasts millennia. On the next concentric ring comes
    governance—the rather long-lasting systems of monarchies and
    republics. The next level is infrastructure—the roads and utilities
    those governments build and rebuild. Faster yet is commerce that
    occurs through that infrastructure. And finally, the outermost ring
    is that of fashion—the ever-changing styles and whims that keep the
    wheels of commerce fed.’ — *Present Shock*, Douglas Rushkoff
    referring to Stewart Brand’s book *The Clock of the Long Now*

[^13simplysmart_7]: ‘Personal content: I feel like they are considered 'smart' when
    they use a new partly unsupported experimental property that makes
    my 2015 computer burn through hell, but then they place a pop-up
    telling me I don't deserve to get access to the content because I
    don't want to throw away my decently functioning computer for a new
    one.’ — Unnamed Web Developer



# Scott Gives Me an Assignment

> Where the capitalist class sees education as a means to an end, the
> vectoralist[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_1] class sees it as an end in itself. It sees
> opportunities to make education a profitable industry in its own
> right, based on the securing of intellectual property as a form of
> private property. To the vectoralists, education, like culture, is
> just 'content' for commodification.
>
> — McKenzie Wark, A Hacker’s Manifesto

One day last year, I was sitting on a comfortable office chair in
Scott’s studio, looking out the window after twenty minutes of staring
at a screen. The clouds over the tower cranes looked creamy; their image
absorbed my slippery thoughts. I was supposed to regain my focus,
prepare my ears for the assignment Scott was about to give me. Shifting
my gaze towards the tower cranes helped—their image reminded me that, at
this point in civilization, I will not live to see the day that these
clouds *aren’t* accompanied by cranes.

Some sort of ‘private’ social media platform was being built for the
students of a renowned academy overseas. The purpose of the platform was
to connect these students by allowing them to set up personal goals on
their accounts, follow classes, events, or other students, and to share
relevant media objects and references in their shared ‘baskets’. To
connect them even more, an option for the students to set up a specific
time zone was built. All data and information bits extracted from these
interactions were to be used solely for educational purposes.

As most of these functions were already built and working, the project
had reached a crucial phase in its development, which focused on user
participation and connection—a phase I call the ‘psychological touch’.

Scott was busy coding the invisible functions for online *what-if*
situations. The code’s logic behind most of the what-if situations is to
make something happen (clicking) in order to extract bits. The question
behind a what-if situation can be answered with at least three
solutions. For example:

What if the user doesn’t have friends?

1. Remind them.
2. Propose to connect their friends’ list from another platform.
3. Suggest a friend.

What if the user doesn’t go to an event?

1. Perhaps they could be interested in updates about said event?
2. You don’t have to go but you can follow the event, which is part of a
series, so maybe you can go next time.
3. Are you sure?

What if the user doesn’t react to the picture of a cat?

1. Here is a cuter cat.
2. How about a reduced amount of cat content?
3. But all your friends like it!

What if the user doesn’t move the cursor?

1. Wait for seven seconds, then show a video of a cursor on steroids. The
longer the hovering, the bigger the cursor will grow.
2. Wait for seven seconds, then make the menu bounce.
3. Just let the ad appear with a big X button.

By answering these questions, the web developer’s forever-aim is to make
the user *do* something and populate the website with information that
represents activity and traffic. Because most platforms are slightly
alienating at first, these situations usually occur at the beginning of
a platform’s life—before the platform gets populated with the users’
digital traces.

When the website gets busy due to the compliance of its users, the
responsibility of the what-if codes passes onto the users, who then
become the new psychological trigger for continuous user traffic. When
users see some of their friends liking a post, they will probably like
it too. In this case, the what-if code doesn’t need to remind them that
they have the digital superpowers to like a post.

These are general examples from the worldwide web. Some streams are
relevant and some are absolutely irrelevant to the user who, by now, is
embedded on the platform enough to be able to sense the information’s
relevance, and who feels alarmed when information lacks the promise of
relevance’s continuity. In the case of an educational platform, things
get a bit trickier. Why would students *not* want to participate in
online activities their educator provides? I see this as an argument
Scott can easily win, for students want to score in the eyes of the
institution that supplies their online educational activities.

Winning this argument gives Scott eligibility to control how connected
he wants the users to be. ‘Good’ web developers are expected to reduce
the duration of user alienation by making the users generate bits as
soon as they land on a platform. These class-A developers are deeply
aware of the detours the users can potentially follow on a platform, and
can guide these users into walking a ‘straight line’ by coding their
behavior in advance.

Before giving me the assignment, Scott expressed how he wanted me to
code the actual functions for the platform, but also added, with a
smile, how I’m *just not there yet*. Until I gain eligibility (during my
free time after work, that is) let’s just work with what we have, shall
we? Let’s give this website a tone, for the English language is the one
understood by all.

Unsure whether I sensed his pride, or simply guilt for giving me work he
would rather not do himself, I directly followed Scott’s instructions.
My task was to write sentences that point out the user’s inactivity and
<s>trigger the user to generate data</s> motivate the user to share
references, go to events, connect, and contribute to the overall
knowledge production.

As a reaction to my excitement, Scott preached how user motivation could
only be achieved through a language that *avoids* literally describing
what the user isn’t doing, but rather describes the consequences of
their inactivity on the platform.

I *roger’ed* that. I used it as a mantra throughout the whole working
day, which I spent writing a presentable version of the following list:

<center>There are no upcoming courses you’re a follower of. (FACT)</center>

<center>You are not following any upcoming courses. (FACT)</center>

<center>Courses that you follow will be listed below. (SUGGESTIVE)</center>

<center>To see the courses below, you must first follow them. (TOO SUGGESTIVE)</center>

<center>There are no events scheduled this week.</center>

<center>There are no events scheduled for next week.</center>

<center>There are no events scheduled for the selected week.</center>

<center>You are not attending any events this week.</center>

<center>You are not attending any events next week.</center>

<center>You are not attending any events in that particular week.</center>

<center>Events which you are attending will appear below. (SUGGESTIVE)</center>

<center>Students, faculty, staff from the same time zone and of similar
interests you follow will appear below/here. (SUGGESTIVE)</center>

<center>Activity baskets related to the courses you’re following will appear below/here. (SUGGESTIVE)</center>

<center>There are no people from the courses you followed.</center>

<center>There are no baskets you’re part of related to this course.</center>

<center>This person doesn’t follow any courses.</center>

<center>You don’t follow mutual courses with this person.</center>

<center>This person has no mutual courses with other people yet.</center>

<center>This person has not contributed to baskets with other people yet.</center>

<center>This person doesn’t own any baskets yet.</center>

<center>This person doesn’t contribute to any baskets yet.</center>

<center>You are not following any course related to this basket yet.</center>

<center>You are not a part of any basket related to any courses.</center>

<center>You are not.</center>

It took a rather long time because I hated it, for similar reasons as to why I
hate Wordle.[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_2] While re-reading my written suggestions what bothered
me most was the impersonal tone behind them. Somehow, I couldn’t make
them sound as if they were written by Scott’s guts, or crafted by his
brain. Polite is hard—I screamed long and hard inside my assigned,
linguistic trap, and I felt like a loser for not having a *natural*
sense for it.

But let’s get one thing clear: within the web development scene, it
doesn’t matter if politeness is a manner exercised in a web developer’s
daily life. It’s a globally recognized strategy for building a platform.
If he doesn’t make his product speak politely to the user in order to
get the so desired bits, the product is at risk of sounding either too
feminine or too authoritative—the two tones that, by 2022’s default,
carry the risk of the user’s flight mode. Let’s deconstruct these web
trends.

Feminine-sounding software doesn’t shy away from using their technical
weak points as a digital marketing tool. Here’s an example of how they
intentionally sound vulnerable:

<center>Whoops 😅. Please keep on patiently clicking the button until it works!</center>

At the other end of the spectrum, we see an authoritative tone in some
software that triggers fantasies of digital suicides, but never their
commitment:

<center>It’s someone’s birthday. Help them have a blast!

or

Are you aware that \[user name\]’s post was liked over 10 times already?</center>

One user, confronted with his inability to opt-out, texted me: *Fuck
Insta, but I’m still on it.* Fuck smartphones, but I still own one.

The neutral, polite tone of software protects it from sounding
different—sounding like too much of something. The factual tone of
politeness targets devotion of a user (who, if you recall, I’ve
introduced before) and who needs to be promised that, as a respected
client on the platform, their needs are constantly taken into account.
Even if they’re in fact not always met.

I need a small detour for a moment. In her book *All About Love*, bell
hooks writes about respect (through a dysfunctional, yet loving family)
in a way that resonates with my own reflections about how respect is
gained within any kind of relationship. As we know from life’s lessons,
there are two possible intentions behind giving respect: the first one
is established through the genuine love and/or care for the other, and
the second one is constructed towards the demand for a specific amount
of reciprocal respect.

The first one, as hooks sees it, is given in the context of an intimate,
ongoing relationship between two parties—a parent, a friend, a friend
with benefits, a lover, spouse, collaborator. Their roles or titles are
established over time. In the case of the latter—respect in return for
respect—two parties don’t necessarily *need* to get deeply involved or
spend any time with each other for them to *want* the desired benefit
from one another. Their roles or titles are set by default. They stay
together because of a mutual need for the bits, thus proving the
professionalization of their role/title: a web developer, a user,
seller, buyer. Quantification makes them stronger.

If I were to apply these same lessons regarding respect to web
development, I’d find it difficult to conclude that the web developer’s
intention behind welcoming the user on their platform comes out of pure
*generosity* towards the user whose image, in the developer’s eyes, is
shaped by the statistics generated from their compliance.

Please read:

<center>There are no baskets you’re part of related to this course.</center>

The sentence suggests that the reason why I’m here (following the
courses I want, in order to be a good student) is inherently linked to
these baskets I know nothing about, but about which I apparently
*should* find out, such as why I need to carry them everywhere I go.
Wait: let me ask one of my few friends on this platform real quick.
Until I find out, let me just speculate. When I think of real-life
baskets, I think about what’s in them… It might be that the digital ones
related to my courses are still empty? It might be that they’re filled
with a surprise, by default? Let me check. But, actually, if the
surprise is really in there, I might not even want it. I’d rather have
my friend drop one in there, but they haven’t replied yet. Maybe they’re
following a lecture I wasn’t updated about. Where are the events? Let me
see…

This is how a platform gets populated and becomes a common user
reality.[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_3] Quickly. Seamlessly. Almost invisibly. Assuming that a
listening ear means being able to register everything that the user
opinionates about, and that this user needs to see the information bits
in order to feel heard, we see how ‘polite’ software entitles itself to
collect the user data and activity it needs in order to increase user
dependency. And because users build up important archives while
generating traffic, they soon become dependent on platforms that store
and organize their data for them. Naughty baskets!

This is not really news, so let’s not dwell on these findings for too
long. What I’m more interested in, is looking at the impact of this user
dependency on polite software and the fashion of our conversations in
real life. (And in stating ‘our’, I am in fact stating that we’re *all*
users, including web developers.)

There are no baskets. There is one basket. There are two baskets. There
are three baskets. There are four baskets. There are five baskets. There
are six baskets. There are seven baskets.

(I think we get the point.)

While rating a product or confessing about romantic endeavors in a
chatroom here or there or everywhere, polite software awards the user
with facts that inform the user about what they just did:

You just left the group,

Thank you for your feedback,

OK,

Thanks,

OK, OK, thanks, thanks. OK, thanks, thanks.

Rate?

It’s exactly 21:00 PM.

It’s your bed time.

It’s a fact that you just left the group.

It’s true that you just left the group.

The user is continuously fed facts, and will pass these on to others (be
it software or a friend). Facts are known to compile together the system
of truth.[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_4] When polite software collects the extracts of truth—all
the things the user talks about, rates, and reacts to wherever the user
is told to react—the logic behind its code becomes stronger and kills
any potential to behave against it. You cannot just *not* rate a
product, but you can give it less stars. Are you sure you want to close
the tab without sending that e-mail? This is what I call an extremely
organized user experience, a linear story. Like waking up, going to
work, and going to sleep. Everything works perfectly.

Understood as such, polite software becomes a product of not just
controlled language, but of the imagination that stretches this
vocabulary. A language that should be in continuous transformation,
molded by those who speak it, moving towards understanding each other,
is a language that is now a standard: one that says what should be
understood between the speakers, and how deep a discussion can really
go.[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_5]

Moving along with such a user experience can be compared to our
behaviours within urban landscapes. Isn’t the point of going outside to
get from point A to point B? In Amsterdam more than in Mexico City, or
Sarajevo, for sure. Although I’m totally fine with not having a goal
while walking, I’ve seen a lot of my peers struggling to say yes to the
idea of an aimless stroll. Just like them, I feel users suffer from
feeling lost on platforms that *don’t* extract bits from their
interactions. They simply don’t how to move about without being part of
both the urban and software organization.

As for Scott and myself: I do not know what Scott wanted me to learn
that day. What I *did* learn is that politeness is not only a design
choice, but the rule by which a web developer chooses to live. When
isolated from the product and placed next to the hands that crafted it,
politeness becomes a shield that protects the acquired years-old
knowledge from intertwining with the emotional impulses (passion, anger,
desire...) that have the potential to cause its shattering. Because most
of the time is invested in maintaining a stable structure of knowledge,
these impulses are rushed, postponed, or even completely neglected. This
is the core behavior that builds up the stoic man: the logic of the
world robbing him of his boner.[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_6]



————————————————————————————————————————

<p id="passage-quote">*‘The object of information, never a subject in communication’ — Sadie
Plant, Zeros and Ones*</p>

————————————————————————————————————————

[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_1]: The ascendant power over both labor and capital is the vectoralist
    class. It does not control land or industry anymore, just
    information.

[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_2]: Its software design feels fun, at first. Guessing the word of the
    day right every single day of one’s life can make one excited about
    waking up. But it can also overwhelm one’s experience of daily life
    as it consumes good chunks of one’s morning time or, depending what
    kind of a player one is, the whole day. Don’t play Wordle. It’s an
    attention sucking platform that makes you forget about the things
    you’d rather do throughout the day and prioritize attaining the joy
    of beating your pals who scored just as good as you did. The worst
    part of it is that cheating feels terribly wrong. And that I still
    sometimes play it.

[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_3]: ‘The scaling of the economy of gender features most prominently
    across discussions surrounding “big data.’ For example, every
    forty-eight hours online we as a global community generate as much
    information as was generated in written history from the beginning
    of civilization until 2003.1) This data we generate triggers
    monumental questions about mass surveillance and how the information
    tied to our digital selves can be used to track our every movement.
    Our Internet search histories, social media habits, and modes of
    online communication—what sociologist David Lyon calls ‘actual
    fragments’—expose our innermost thoughts, anxieties, plans, desires,
    and goals. 2) Gender binary is a part of this engine: a body read
    online as male/female, masculine/feminine fulfills a target
    demographic for advertising and marketing. Google Ads explains
    gleefully to its users how ‘with demographic targeting in Google
    Ads, you can reach a specific set of potential customers who are
    likely to be within a particular age range, gender, parental status,
    or household income. For instance, if you run a fitness studio
    exclusively for women, demographic targeting could help you avoid
    showing your ads to men.’ — Legacy Russell, *Glitch Feminism*

[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_4]: ‘The way to flourish in a media space biased toward nonfiction is
    to tell the truth. This means having a truth to tell.’ — Douglas
    Rushkoff, *Program or be Programmed*

[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_5]: ‘Information, like land or capital, becomes a form of property
    monopolised by a class of vec- toralists, so named because they
    control the vectors along which information is abstracted, just as
    capitalists control the material means with which goods are
    produced, and pastoralists the land with which food is produced.
    Information circulated within working class culture as a social
    property belonging to all. But when information in turn becomes a
    form of private property, workers are dispossessed of it, and must
    buy their own culture back from its owners, the vectoralist class.
    The whole of time, time itself, becomes a commodified experience.’ —
    McKenzie Wark, *A Hacker’s Manifesto*

[^14scottgivesmeanassignment_6]: Ariana Reines, *A Sand Book*, poem: ‘Hegeling before the glass’



# Wordpress Cringe

The reasons for a so-called ‘WordPress cringe’ that exists for both its
users and the web developers working with it are understandable: the
plug-ins break with each update, and the back-end interface is, well,
pretty *ugly*. Web developers cringing at WordPress software made me
wonder why a different software with the same listing system couldn’t be
a solution (such as, for example, Kirby).

WordPress is a web builder software that is, at the time of writing this, nineteen years old. When it was released for free in 2003, it soon
became the market leader of the blogging tools industry, allowing both
users and developers to extend its default functionalities by writing
their own plug-ins and sharing these with the rest of the online
community.

In 2005, the world discovers WordPress version 1.5, an incredibly
flexible theme system that adapts to the user rather than expecting the
users to adapt to *it*. This already hints at the fact that there were
some software limitations, but what this specifically meant was that
headers, footers and sidebars could be placed on specific pages and not
necessarily on all of them, such as before. I guess some users didn’t
like feeling constrained by component repetition across pages.

By 2010, WordPress version 3.0 enabled the user to customize the styling
of the default *Twenty Ten*-theme. The theme became an annual mirror to
the user’s taste in grids, and continues to update itself every year.

The year is Twenty Twenty-Two: The Most Flexible Default WordPress Theme
of all times. Built to reflect the modern user needs, it is inspired by
birds, offers six color palettes, and encourages as little use of CSS as
possible—because *Global styles* are just a few clicks away. Apart from
style, WordPress stays focused on improving a full website editing
experience, for its future direction solely depends on the needs of
millions of web publishers around the world, a.k.a. its users.

Years of WordPress’ changing according to the user’s and web developer’s
needs made WordPress survive as the leading publishing software on the
internet, with more than 43 percent of all websites built under its
wings. So, why oh why, do users *cringe* so hard at the software that
updates itself recursively alongside their digital wishes? To answer
this question, I’d like to explore the technical, stylistic, and
personal perspectives of Wordpress’ cringe.

1\. What is Technical Cringe?

> Openness is an unruly concept. While free tends toward ambiguity (free
> as in speech, or free as in beer?), open tends toward obfuscation.
> Everyone claims to be open; everyone has something to share, everyone
> agrees that being open is the obvious thing to do—after all, openness
> is the other half of “open source”—but for all of its obviousness,
> being “open” is perhaps the most complex component of Free Software.
> It is never quite clear whether being open is a means or an end.
> Worse, the opposite of open in this case (specifically, “open
> systems”) is not closed, but “proprietary”—signaling the complicated
> imbrication of the technical, the legal, and the commercial.
>
> — Christopher M. Kelty, *Two Bits:* *The Cultural Significance of Free
> Software*

When a software cracks open and enables web developers to access and
expand its set of functionalities through modifying the default code and
contributing to it with plugins, it makes itself technically vulnerable.
It leads to standardization, civilization, exponential growth:

> Standardization was at the heart of the contest, but by whom and by
> what means was never resolved… We don’t live in a world of “The
> Computer” but in a world of computers: myriad, incompatible, specific
> machines.
>
> — Christopher M. Kelty, *Two Bits: The Cultural Significance of Free
> Software*

Under the current conditions of the tech market, all of this/the
software becomes a playground for competition; a potential space for
exploitation. Not just a few, but *many* of the plugins that perform the
same task, all coded by amazing web developers who don’t really
communicate with each other, end up competing for what the study
material of these developers taught them: user attention. Each plugin,
instead of finding itself one too many to choose from, finds itself
wanting to be one in a million.

Openness is an unruly concept. The price of software’s freedom is the
user’s unfriendliness: the technical slowdown that comes with every new
software update.

Here, we end up confronted again with the simple fact that there is no
*universal* user, although most of our software expects there to be.
Some users are more attuned to the tools and technologies they’re using,
while others prefer to stay busy with non-technical things. Some users
are curious enough to learn more about the back-end and maintenance of
their digital presentation, while others prefer their websites to be
independent.

The ecosystem of WordPress puts most web developers in a position of not
questioning or even understanding the extent to which their clients
and/or users want to express themselves on their respective digital
interfaces. How do they want to use the back-end? How often? What is the
function of the website?

Only when true user needs are understood can technology become a
cultural meeting ground upon which we can look away from the image of a
universal user and learn about their socio-political situation, class,
and culture through their relationship with technology. This takes time,
for this often constitutes the unpaid analysis of the process of web
development. And because this analysis is not per se encouraged by the
web developer during the whole development process, he opts for a
standard setup of the back-end, one that leaves the users in fear of
clicking that crucial update button.

2\. What is Stylistic Cringe?

Because the WordPress’s community shares all issue-related matters, the
users can easily find out what exactly is wrong with the issues they’re
having. Sometimes the most curious of users even go further in
researching possible solutions than the web developers do. Because of
this transparency, developers refrain from identifying with the software
and would rather opt to settle for a less user accessible techne-pack,
or their own proprietary version of WordPress (such as BlockSmith).

This rarely discussed reason behind the web developer’s pride has a
cleaned-up version: instead of confessing to their opinions, a web
developer finds themselves persuading their clients and/or users that the
interface design of WordPress is *just horrible*. Because of the
personal sensitivity that style installs in every user, the user is
easily persuaded and charges extra for the time it took their
(presumably male) web developer to build their own CMS.

Irony alert: everyone cringes at the underlying fact that WordPress is
accessible to all in the blink of an eye and can make anyone feel like
they are able to code and build websites. I, personally, don’t see why
anyone *shouldn’t* just build their own websites.

3\. What is Personal Cringe?

Besides being the very best version of a Post-WordPress web developer I
can be today, just because it felt cute, my reasons for *cringing* will
most likely bring me to delete this identification later. Throughout my
cringe studies, I was hoping that someone would complain about the
listing and/or archival logic of the WordPress and WordPress inspired
softwares, and how its modularity promises a false freedom that one
eventually ends up feeling a victim of, or at the very least dubious of.

My cringe derives from confusion: I’m still puzzled by the technical
differences between proprietary CMSs and WordPress; I still wonder why
(and this is probably a question of governance) the users cringe when
openness is technically allowed according to their wishes. Let’s talk
about this.



# Post-Wordpress Web-dev, Fuck It.

Psst, it’s me. Your Post-WordPress web developer. Yeah, I’ll tell you a
bit more about my story.

<center>*\*(intro) What did the subject look like as a healthy and normal person?\**</center>

It all started the day I created my first social media account. Having
an account brought along with it the possibility to fill up my gallery
with personal pictures, select and list top friends on one’s profile,
and fill in the lists asking about one’s favorite movies, foods, and
miscellaneous interests.

Nothing was blank on my Hi5 (Balkan Myspace) profile. I was crafting and
re-crafting it daily. My favorite part was customizing the wallpaper
through copying codes from other platforms in the platform’s hypertext
boxes. I went through many different kinds of wallpapers: from clouds to
black and white skate parks during sunset. Once I entered my
‘pitch-black phase’, I focused more on the quality of my lists and made
sure they showed some good taste.

Styling one’s profile was the most enjoyable part of my user’s
experience. Profiles were exchanged amongst users as exemplary
references to look at while building one’s own.

Today, I can’t tell if enabling the users to apply aesthetic changes on
social media platforms (which were ultimately designed for user
connection) was a deliberate aspect of the platform’s design, but I do
believe this was the reason why the switch to the currently most
dominant one (Facebook), a platform where aesthetic customization is
*disabled*, was so easy.

Between this moment of stylizing my wallpapers in 2009 and my
bureaucratic situation in 2019 lies a huge gap in my coding practice.
Attending the bootcamp school bridged this gap: I started building
websites from scratch, not just inserting codes on someone else’s
platform.

The first few small-scale websites I built were handmade—meaning they
were built with HTML, CSS, and Javascript; basic tools for building any
kind of website. Learning how to build a button, for example, already
made me realize that the design of this button can rather easily
manipulate the user’s mood, akin to how a doorknob of a random door
would. Where does the door lead to? Is it locked? What’s lurking on the
other side? Should I *open* the door? Multiple, diverse types of buttons
leading to a manifold of pages made me wonder about the amount of space
a website occupies within various digital infrastructures.

> *\*(rising action) Which software affected the subject’s condition?\**

At the time when I started building websites for clients, WordPress was
the go-to software to use in order to get a sense of the server-client
traffic behind a website. In the beginning, I charged very little and
said yes to any project or deadline. The projects were simple; the
deadlines extremely tight.

Because I felt rushed, I used theme-building helpers (such as Divi) to
meet the client’s expectations in time. The design would highly depend
on the limitations and freedoms of the software’s given functionalities:
using theme builders that had an easy drag-and-drop functionality to
create the looks of a digital space constrained my creative output. The
limited possibilities these builders provided was not satisfying enough
to feel creatively fulfilling to someone who wanted to break out of the
default grids and blocks, a.k.a: me. Not *seeing* the code that built my
decisions felt weird.

After I built two websites with extra builder products, I felt like a
scam to the world of web development. I felt like *any*body could do it
and that *every*body was doing it. As I was claiming the title of a web
developer, I felt like I had to live up to it. But also, I just really
liked coding. So I started picking up on PHP language and coding custom
themes, after which I finally started feeling like a real web developer
(whatever that means).

Identifying myself with this expert software in the company of other web
developers made me feel quite shy at first, but upon discovering that
the majority of web infrastructure is built with this same software at
some point started making me feel average.

As I was building websites, it seemed to me that the software was
updating itself according to the user’s needs really fast, and that
whatever users lacked in their editing freedom soon became an option in
a plug-in library: a true catering to their needs. It is true that
WordPress software updates not only grow alongside the needs of its
user, but also follow the web developer’s imagination, which, when
turned into a plug-in, can be uploaded to the WordPress Plug-in library.
That’s what open-source means; contributors add themes and plug-ins to
it, for software improvement. ‘All technology reflects the society that
produces it, including its power structures and prejudices.’ — Douglas
Rushkoff, *Program or be Programmed*.

I don’t know if being content with theory justifying my software choice
was naive, but I was having fun. I was entertained by the underlying
irony of the previously explained WordPress cringe.

> *\*(climax) How did the subject liberate oneself from the software’s
> constraints?\**

That’s when I became a Post-WordPress web developer. As a Post-WordPress
web developer, I knew what I *didn’t* want from my coding endeavors:
plug-ins (unless custom-coded), hamburger menu (unless absolutely
necessary), WP default styling (a.k.a. classification and names
according to the semantics), a deadline within the month, and having to
say yes to the reducing amount of pages as well as meeting the client
once a week. I wanted to make rules that would bring me closer to
building *light* websites at a *slow* pace—what my friend Clara calls
‘handmade coding’.

With handmade coding, I could build a website like I’d imagined building
a space back in the days of studying architecture: hand in hand with the
inhabitant or citizen, the user, and their individual taste. Our
collaboration would mean meeting and building each other’s differences,
on whatever interface necessary.[^16postwordpresswebdevfuckit_1]

The *post* in my title refers to the fact that even though I am aware of
the WordPress cringe, it’s the tool I choose to operate with despite its
reputation. That in my productivity I have found liberation, not
software enslavement; that WordPress will succumb to my needs and
accommodate the skills necessary for me to have whilst collaborating
with my client.

Here comes an example of my liberation. The following code was written
for the client’s portfolio website and in agreement with the client:

####&lt;details&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp; &lt;summary style="margin-left: 50%"&gt;editor&lt;/summary&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp; &lt;?php \$loop = new WP\_Query( array( 'post\_type' =&gt; 'editor', &emsp; 'posts\_per\_page' =&gt; 10 ) );


####&emsp;&emsp; if ( \$loop-&gt;have\_posts() ):

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; while ( \$loop-&gt;have\_posts() ) : \$loop-&gt;the\_post();

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; ?&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; &lt;details class="secondary-details"&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; &lt;summary class="project" id="editor-project"

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; onclick="editorProjectTop()"&gt;&lt;?php the\_title('⊃&nbsp;');

####&emsp;&emsp; ?&gt;&lt;/summary&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; &lt;div class="entry-content"&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; &lt;?php the\_content(); ?&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; &lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; &lt;div class="mode-buttons"&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; &lt;button class="feel-btn" onclick="editorProjectTop()"&gt;see, hear,&emsp; sense&lt;/button&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; &lt;button class="read-btn"

####&emsp;&emsp; onclick="editorProjectTop()"&gt;read&lt;/button&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; &lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; &lt;/details&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp; &lt;?php endwhile;


####&emsp;&emsp; else: ?&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp; &lt;p&gt;&lt;?php echo '&lt;div&emsp; class=“void"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;’;?&gt;&lt;/p&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp; &lt;?php endif;


####&emsp;&emsp; wp\_reset\_query();

####&emsp;&emsp; ?&gt;

####&lt;/details&gt;

The code indicates that there is a button called ‘editor’ on the
website, which is one of the professional roles that define the client’s
professional history. Clicking on this button opens a list of project
titles (‘secondary-details’) in which this role is played out. Each
project (‘editor-project’) is also clickable and when clicked opens the
content (‘entry-content’) the client added to it in the admin panel of
the website.

Content is divided between two reading modes: visual and textual. By
default, textual content opens on the first click. Once you reach the
end of the content, there is a button that switches between two reading
modes (‘feel-btn’ and ‘read-btn’, *btn* being button). If there are no
projects assigned to this role, one can choose to show void (‘void’). A
void, in my collaboration with this respective client, was represented
by a dark blue circle piercing the soft aesthetics of the website. In a
nutshell: handmade coding of a fairly light website.

The code explained here is my favorite code written thus far. It
speculates on the client’s future, doesn’t limit it to one professional
role, nor demands the existing roles to be filled with more professional
activities. It was written with the purpose to emphasise the uncertainty
any professional role might have. These professional roles could fade
out and turn into the designed void (dark blue circle), or they could be
emphasized more and be accompanied by other projects in the future.

After passing two interviews for the ‘creative developer’ role at
WeTransfer in 2021, I was invited to work on a technical assignment. The
challenge was to code a ‘whack-a-mole’ game through which the company
could get a sense of my creativity level. There was no framework,
language, tool or imagination requirements, but there was one big ask:
not to spend too much time on the task. In the span of the single week I
was given to develop it, I spent a total of nine hours on it.

Adding to this, I must say my creativity depends on other people. I
found and copy-pasted the simplest HTML/CSS/Javascript code of a
whack-a-mole (by Ania Kubów) and decided to change the code according to
my friends’ answers to the question: *If you could whack one thing for
the rest of your life, what would it be?*

One of the answers was Facebook:

####&lt;body&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;header&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div class="display-flex"&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;p&gt;Facebook killed:&lt;/p&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;p id="score"&gt;0&lt;/p&gt;&lt;p&gt; times.&lt;/p&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div class="display-flex"&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;p&gt;Time Left:&lt;/p&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;p id="time-left"&gt;666&lt;/p&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;/header&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div class="grid"&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="1" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="2" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="3" class="square facebook"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="4" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="5" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="6" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="7" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="8" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="9" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="10" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="11" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="12" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="13" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="14" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;div id="15" class="square"&gt;&lt;/div&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;/div&gt;


####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;footer&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&lt;p&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;\[person\] undoubtedly wants to whack Facebook all the time, and for a long time. &lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;Is your name not \[person\] &lt;a href="/index.html"&gt;My name is not \[person\].&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/p&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;/footer&gt;

####&lt;/body&gt;

This is the body of a web page that was built to show the score (how
many times Facebook was whacked); above it one can see the countdown
time. Underneath this, a grid of fifteen squares floats in which the
logo of Facebook appears randomly, and which the user is expected to
click or shoot. The footer of the page asks if the user’s name is
\[person\]’s name, a.k.a. if they wish to be someone else while whacking
this evil, Zuckerberg-spawn thing.

The code was adjusted to the \[person\]’s specific desires in whacking
Facebook, which was done in the following ways: even though the timer’s
countdown started counting down from 666 seconds, there was, if desired,
additional time given for completion of the mission (1,000 seconds).
Next to this, the Facebook logo would hang around in one of the grid’s
squares, long enough to shoot it. It was rather impossible to miss.
Unfortunately, the message at the end of the countdown reminds the user
that, despite their astonishing scores, Facebook still exists.

####function countDown() {

####&emsp;&emsp;currentTime--

####&emsp;&emsp;timeLeft.textContent = currentTime

####&emsp;&emsp;if (currentTime == 0) {

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;clearInterval(countDownTimerId)

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;clearInterval(timerId)

####&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;&emsp;alert('There is no time left to whack Facebook. Despite your score of: '+ result + ' points, Facebook still exists.')

####&emsp;&emsp;}

####}

####let countDownTimerId = setInterval(countDown, 1,000)

I furthermore collected eight answers from my peers to the question
*What would you whack?* The results were: a lack of confidence, eczema,
architecture (i.e. one school building per day), sea creatures, Gerald
Darmanin, applications and/or funding opportunities, and ‘I would whack
people who think that rationality is better than emotions and
intuitions; I would whack everyone who expects and forces me to be
“clear” according to *their* understanding of clarity; I would whack the
idea that if you make work you have to be able to write about it; I
would whack people who tell me what to do and how to do things without
me asking for it; I would whack people who say that they would never
drink their own pee if they were in the desert almost dying. *Liars.*’

I loved turning the project into research about what my peers would
whack and discovering if my coded reflections on their wishes could get
me hired for my creativity level. During the interview with a front-end
web developer at WeTransfer, I was told that I was *sooo very* creative.

You can find out the answer to the question whether I got the job or not
by reading the following ‘list’ of websites I dream of building, yet
never have the time to:

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="https://whack-what.vercel.app/"&gt;This was a technical assignment for WeTransfer, but I didn't get the job.&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="/instagram-poetry/ig\_bore.html"&gt;IG bore&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="\#"&gt;Click here to stop scrolling&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="\#"&gt;Blue Heart Agency&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="\#"&gt;I Just Wanna&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="\#"&gt;Button Poetry&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="\#"&gt;The Writer is Present&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="\#"&gt;We only got 10 mins to save the content&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="\#"&gt;Mute everything&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="\#"&gt;Forever load, but not like that&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="\#"&gt;Rotating structures, floating points, and similar&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="\#"&gt;All known blanks&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

####&emsp;&emsp;&lt;a href="\#"&gt;Working station of profile production&lt;/a&gt;&lt;br&gt;

It’s not a list in code. Were I to write semantic code, it’d be wrapped
in a &lt;ul&gt;&lt;/ul&gt; tag, followed by a &lt;li&gt; tag around each
&lt;a&gt; tag. Then I’d get rid of the line break tags (&lt;br&gt;). The
way this list looks like right now doesn’t bother me in the slightest.
Any web developer inspecting it might find these codes very simple,
because they *are*. And they bring me a lot of joy.

[^16postwordpresswebdevfuckit_1]: [*https://motherfuckingwebsite.com/*](https://motherfuckingwebsite.com/)



# Female Freelancer

> *\*(falling action) Don’t doubt the subject’s feminism\**

If I do not become a corporation I will never beat the assholes to the
moon

If someone is to go to the moon let me sing you a love song

Let it be me

— Ariana Reines, *A Sand Book*, ‘The Long Love that in my Thought Doth
Harbor’

In 2021 I was very much flirting with the idea of building my own
software. When I shared my goal with Scott, he told me *Good luck*, then
eventually asked: If writing semantic code is not your cup of tea, then
why don’t you just stick to your writing practice instead?

My first answer to that question would be to point out the irony behind
it. After my fadeout from his studio, I seriously started answering his
question with an occasional pat on the shoulder whenever I reminded
myself of my software plan.

The only way out is through, I thought.[^17femalefreelancer_1] Compared to the lack of
choices with BlockSmith software, my own software would allow more
choice to the user—for that’s always the developer’s goal. Maybe in
collaboration with someone else’s brain, I’d figure out what kind of
software that would be.

Out of sheer excitement, I called Clara to see if she’d be interested in
sharing this dream and becoming a powerful female duo. Slow, poetic,
more creative, and, most of all: very capable.

This power woman image led me to believe that we could change the
classic reasons as to why everybody wants to hire a female web developer
right now, in tech corporations, companies, start-ups, educational
institutions, etc. (Slow, poetic, more creative, capable, and, most of
all: cheaper.)[^17femalefreelancer_2]

With a software by our side, Clara and I would improve the image of
female employability, expanding it into safer spaces where the female
developer can be her true self.

For example: art academies. Due to the well-known ego politics and
patriarchal power dynamics that must be urgently dealt with when
encountered, most academies don’t have time to find out what exactly
they want from the coding tutor they’re looking for. They just know
that, if they still want to be relevant and contemporary, they urgently
need one. Because of a general lack of discourse regarding web
development, it’s hard for these academies to recognize various
educational needs of the (art) practice. Their uncertainty puts them in
a position of not being able to take any risks, and often leads them to
play it safe, hiring the technically most skilled candidate who can fill
a gap, solve a problem, quick, fail-proof.

For example: in tech corporations and start-ups, where the teams consist
of mostly men, a female web developer enters the team as an added
‘light energy’. Where the team’s goal is focused on the technical
progress, a female web developer injects the milestones with her
decorative, design touch. Most of the time, she does so in the tasks
related to the project’s documentation, presentation, and revision—the
process, not the finalization. This is the world we live in.

But, with software by our side, we (Clara and I) could put an end to
this kind of thinking. This, however, sounded too dreamy.

This power woman image threw me into the depths of identity politics
more than the basics of software development—which, truth be told, is
what got me excited about the plan in the first place. The burden of our
software, no matter how technologically crafted, would be its
representation, cornering us in the thread that continues around the equal
positioning of women in the history of technology. It would also corner
us into celebrating the fact that women *invented* the classification
system; that men got recognition for it *before* women started doubting
whether it’s the best system; that even though women were the ones
entirely writing the programs that enabled machines to work, they were
kept on the sidelines (Do you remember the term ‘kilo-girl’—1,000 hours
of computing labor—in the 1940s? No? Look it up.)

I don’t want my main role in web development to be the constant
retelling of the history of women’s (dis)placement within technology, as
this is not *the only* way to build history. Yet for the sake of
commemorating those women who contributed to computing throughout the
history (1700s, a gap, then 1900s till present day), here is a full list
of these women worth remembering from a publication called *Computers at
Work*: Nicole Reine Lepaure (built a clock for astronomical
observations); Ada Lovelace (first computer programmer); Anna Winlock
(mapped the universe for 2 cents/hour, which was half a man’s pay back
then); Antonia Maury (improved the system of classification by
redesigning it); Annie Jump Cannon (developed a stellar classification
system, namely the Harvard Classification Scheme);[^17femalefreelancer_3] Henrietta Swan Leavitt
(discovered galaxies beyond the Milky Way); Dorothy Vaughan (NACA’s
first black manager, self-taught in FORTRAN, prepared her staff for the
transition from human to machine computers); Mary Jackson (NASA’s first
black female engineer); Katherine Johnson; ENIAC (Kathleen McNulty Antonelli, Jean Jennings Bartik, Betty Snyder Holberton, Marlyn Wescoff Meltzer, Ruth Lichterman Teitelbaum, and Frances Bilas Spence); Kathleen Booth; Grace Murray Hopper; Margaret Hamilton; Mary Kenneth Keller; Katie Bouman, and Donna Strickland.

Extending this list with Clara would end up proving that we’re competent
enough for the industry. Doing ‘average’ development would disqualify us
as developers; what’s more, we would have to be excellent just to get
recognized. We would have to become the stoic men.

The hardest thing about building software is deciding *what* to say, not
the act of saying it. More choice is never the answer to the question of
online freedom. As Douglas Rushkoff said: ‘The more choices we make (or
are forced to make) the more we believe our expectations will be met.
But in actual experience, our pursuit of choice has the effect of making
us less engaged, more obsessive, less free, and more controlled.’ More
beta-versions of choices lead to final choices offered by a new
software. We’re never *not* perceived as full of attention.[^17femalefreelancer_4] In the
potential failure of my software, new systems would emerge in its wake.

In all this confusion, what seemed to be an immense desire to build a
software became an immense desire to just be *materialised* *thought*.
Can I be Sadie Plant’s brain, or that of Guangyi Li, [Mindy
Seu](https://cyberfeminismindex.com/), [Nancy
Wu](https://a-website-is-a-room.net/)? Can I be this website,[^17femalefreelancer_5] Carlo
Rovelli’s whispers[^17femalefreelancer_6] in *Real Review\#11*, Ben Grosser’s Minus, the
digital minister Audrey Tang, or Maggie Nelson’s latest book, *On
Freedom*? But then I also know: I still want to continue writing code
for others.

The web development’s history, full of evidence on top of evidence, of
rights and wrongs about the way one can and should be allowed to code,
makes it hard to see coding as a craft for establishing a ground where
realistic ambitions between developers and users can be met. Only when a
developer is able to explain to their clients the technologies used, the
reasons behind using them, their effect, and how to engage with them,
can be seen to what extent realistic ambitions could be met. The
developer, then, is building in collaboration; not just with the aim to
solve a problem. Not all collaborations are problematic: this is what
Silvio Lorusso encourages us to do in his article ‘Code to Learn’.[^17femalefreelancer_7]
New bootcamp schools are popping up all over the place, new ones
arriving as soon as the old ones go bankrupt, while start-up companies
and corporations are increasing the demand for more developers. Yet no
matter how highly paid or desired these developers are made to feel,
there will always be a satisfying amount of workers or developers
*hating* their jobs, wishing for a better standard.

> *\*(the point) Is the point of the subject to empower users to also
> take control of the tools they*’*re using?\**

Were I to wrap up this book with a list of issues at stake, and another
one listing the coping strategies for said issues, I’d definitely start
from the main issue being the consequence of the tech industry’s
promises of global governance: user’s inability to not participate in
online activities from which data is extracted and accumulated. Imagine
how a user’s conscious choice to move through the online world, with
limited choice-making via the clicking of buttons, would reflect on
their online existence? Furthermore, on their online history of the
self? I do not know, but I’d like to start imagining. Plant knows what I
mean when she writes how ‘zero was always something very different from
the sign which has emerged from the West’s inability to deal with
anything which, like zero, is neither something in particular nor
nothing at all.’ — Sadie Plant, *Zeros and Ones*.

Reflecting on the current state of the internet, the production of
digital histories, the hands behind it that enact its unseen labor, as
well as the enabling of the users’ ‘superpowers’ while they’re on a hunt
for that cultural spark to connect with, has led me to realize that the
internet could be a space for feeling *offline*. Maggie Nelson, in her
book *The Art of Cruelty*, asked an all-round relevant question:
‘Perhaps more controversially still, given our inarguable complicity in
all kinds of systemic forms of global injustice: is there any space left
for not watching, not focusing, not keeping abreast of all the events
and atrocities unfolding in the world, as an ethically viable option?’

> *\*(rising action again) Hmm, but what does the subject want????\**

I want to be free (from feedback loops), and I want others to be free,
too.[^17femalefreelancer_8] Demanding freedom4all seems too naive here. The constraints
from which any urgency is born requires addressing its demands through
its relations to the neighboring factors (such as alienation, agency,
self-governance, survival, consumption, power, class) and which, I
believe, are only to be addressed by the body that feels trapped in its
own constraints. The disordered. Some grow wings in boxes; they adapt.

I can’t stop referring to Maggie Nelson. In *On Freedom*, she asks:
‘What if we don’t presume, however, that there is any bottom to our
desire, that it doesn’t lie in a black box at the bottom of the sea?
What if learning to notice our shifting drives, identities, curiosities,
disinterests, or aversions, be it over the course of an encounter or a
lifetime, is our truer calling?’

Were I to speak from a defined and more developed role (of a writer, web
developer, artist) would I dare to materialize these ambiguities I have
found within my own dubious relationships with these practices? In the
end, it really doesn’t matter if you’re a stoic man, a female web
developer or if you’ve developed your own software, what extravagant
move you make to inject yourself into tech history, if you’re into
coding, or part of a no-coding movement. What matters is how one chooses
to relate to information. Meaning is not *in* the ‘document’, but in
one’s relation *to* it.

In his book *In the Flow*, Boris Groys provokes a linguistic agency for
the human or user when he writes that ‘today we practice our dialogue
with the world primarily via the Internet. If we want to ask questions
to the world, we act as Internet users. And if we want to answer the
questions that the world asks us, we act as content providers.’ Thank
you for this, Groys. So, then. Let’s *think*.

What’s the point of making a website when you can start an Instagram
account instead? What’s the point of writing this book, in fact?
Although revealed late, the starting challenge was to try and answer
Scott’s question: *If writing semantic code is not your cup of tea, then
why don't you just stick to your writing practice?* But to not
necessarily answer it. Sorry not sorry, Scott.

If there’s one personal condition that this book tries to encover within
my own usership, it is that of personal liberation from the circles I
found harsh while dwelling on the internet. And that the amount of
knowledge I’ve gained from writing this book summarizes not only the
level of my commitment to the subject(s), but also the context I am
writing from: my social status, the gain and/or lack of my freelance
gigs, my female ambiguity, my questionable convincing skills, plus the
fact that sometimes, when the world around me gets too loud, starving is
still my default defense mechanism.

<br /><br /><br /><br /><br /><br /><br />
<center>\*fadeout\*</center>
<br /><br /><br /><br />

[^17femalefreelancer_1]: ‘When an uncontainable artist’s influence won’t go away, art
    history compromises by constructing hagiographies. At least that way
    the vision is contained. But you have to keep reminding yourself of
    the great dead artist’s situation. That he also had contemporaries.
    That thoughts are never thought alone.’ —Chris Kraus, *Aliens and
    Anorexia*

[^17femalefreelancer_2]: Hiring a female web developer gives a good image/face to the
    ecosystem where she’s been given a chance. She’s made to believe
    that she is the architect of her temple (exquisite), capable of being
    in control over her money, time, decisions, selfhood, and soul. And
    all of that shall tame her enough to not resist the aesthetic. But
    when she does, the aesthetic will either kick her out of its
    mechanism, or it will be adjusted by professionals to suit her.

[^17femalefreelancer_3]: Stars were organized into classes using seven letters: O, B, A, F,
    G, K, and M (abbreviation of Oh! Be a Fine Girl—Kiss Me!).

[^17femalefreelancer_4]: In *Bitch*, Elizabeth Wurtzel describes the men Amy Fisher was
    surrounded by: ‘It seems that whenever people deal with the world in
    binary oppositions, choosing one thing only because it negates
    another, they are inevitably startled by the discovery that the
    quest for something completely different has only given them more of
    the same.’

[^17femalefreelancer_5]: [*https://www.queeringthemap.com/*](https://www.queeringthemap.com/)

[^17femalefreelancer_6]: In the text, Rovelli structures the consistency of modern reality
    from a technical point of view, but also from a personal, poetic
    interiority. Through his model of reality, he claims that objects
    are temporary visual projections in the current construct of time.
    He distinguishes between, what I understand, a chunk of concrete
    information to nod to, and agreement through feeling. Rovelli states
    that modernity is long gone, exactly because of this complexity of
    understanding basic notions within the time that has become rich
    with content. There are multiple times: of the physicist, of a lover
    waiting for his love to arrive, of a young man dreaming about his
    future, of an industrialist planning economical strategies, and so
    on. These examples, in particular, touched me and made me think of
    attunement as an everyday exercise.

[^17femalefreelancer_7]: [*https://silviolorusso.com/publication/learn-to-code-vs-code-to-learn/*](https://silviolorusso.com/publication/learn-to-code-vs-code-to-learn/)

[^17femalefreelancer_8]: In the second episode (‘The Use and Abuse of Vegetational
    Concepts’) of *All Watched Over by the Machine’s of Loving Grace*,
    Adam Curtis explains cybernetics: ‘Cybernetics said that everything,
    from human brains to cities and even entire societies, could be seen
    as systems regulated and governed by feedback… it seemed to offer a
    new insight into how order is maintained in the world… Cybernetics
    saw human beings not as individuals in charge of their own destiny,
    but as components in systems… They were just nodes in networks,
    acting and resting to flows of information.’



# Acknowledgements

I am so happy to have reached this page where I can express how my
contemplations were never done alone.

Writing ‘Club-Wise: A Theory of Our Time’ helped me to stay awake and
less drunk throughout the sleepless nights of my life as a bartender,
whereas writing ‘Diary of a Stylist’ made me feel human in a world where
everything seemed to act just like an image. This publication, like most
of my previous ones, started from an urge to break free from the
structures I considered restraining to my nourishment of feeling *free*.
And, just like the previous ones, it ends with the realization that
everything is fine, no matter how many times *Fuck it* seemed like the
only way out.

The peers mentioned below are the peers who made my internal inspections
feel comfortable; who encouraged me to always, albeit critically,
embrace boredom in life, a.k.a. to flee from the structures that bore me
once I’ve fully stripped them of their essence.

Thank you, Clara Pasteau, for opening the web-dev scene for me and
teaching me how to kiss my shoulder through the hardships. I still do
it. This freelance path was not completely lone-wolf because of you.
AND: I can’t wait to start a company with you. Alina Lupu and Marlies
van Hak: without your invitation to reflect on the precarious artistic
practices throughout the pandemic, this subject wouldn’t have felt like
the gut feeling it did now, one I decided to follow in order to further
reflect on my coding endeavors. Thank you for tickling the juiciest of
my scars and passions. Talking about those who never cease to nourish
me: this brings me to Geert Lovink, forever. It’s funny because it’s so
obvious; I smile because I don’t know what to thank you for anymore.
Thanks for mentally slouching with me. Oh and, stoic man, thank you for
a short collaboration. It obviously inspired a big chunk of this book.

And then there is the production layer of gratitude: the INC team!!!
Thank you for being so OK with me squatting the office, but also for the
supportive fun times we have &lt;3. It always feels like we’re breaking
the internet when we’re together. Especially thanks to Laurence Scherz,
Sepp Eckenhaussen, and Maria van der Togt for helping with the final
editing and designing of the book. As for my feedback givers, let me
drop some names: Alina Lupu, Françoué Giraremeunier, Aurélien Lepetit,
Anesa Imamović—I absolutely loved every bittersweet word you threw at me
after reading version 1.0. You made me feel proud of my public shyness.
James P.A. Crossley! Thank you for the cover design and pleasant
presence during the process of writing.

And then there is the final layer of gratitude. My dear Imamovićs (Mama
and Tata), thank you for not understanding my theories at all. Eszter
Kiss, for being the apple of my eye. Lacey Verhalen, for cheerleading
(*How is your book going?*) while writing your thesis. Sophie Cloes, for
adopting me in Brussels when and where I started writing the first few
chapters of this book. Ksenia Perek, for convincing me to put my face
all over the cover, then finally suggesting not to do it. Donauweg 8,
for being the sexiest studio space in the middle of nowhere. Donauweg 8,
for giving me the best studio mates (Roman Tkachenko, Lena Karson,
Natalia Blahova). Stefan Pavlović ;) Thank you NXS World, for
commissioning and hosting a part of the text (about the young web
developer). And of course, thanks to all my clients and friends for
hiring me sufficiently so that I could write this book for free.

You make me all heart and no play.



# References

\*BOOKS\*

Boris Groys, *In the Flow*, London: Verso, 2016.

bell hooks, *All About Love*, New York: HarperCollins, 2018.

Christopher M. Kelty, *Two Bits: The Cultural Significance of Free
Software*, Durham: Duke University Press, 2008.

Chris Kraus, *Aliens and Anorexia*, Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2013.

Geert Lovink, *Stuck on the Platform*, Amsterdam: Valiz, 2022.

Maggie Nelson, *On Freedom*, Minneapolis: Graywolf Press, 2021.

Maggie Nelson, *The Art of Cruelty*, New York: W. W. Norton Company,
2011.

Kelsey Osgood, *How to Disappear Completely*, London: Gerald Duckworth &
Co Ltd, 2014.

Sadie Plant, *Zeros and Ones*, London: Fourth Estate, 1998.

Ariana Reines, *A Sand Book*,  United States: Tin House, 2019.

Douglas Rushkoff, *Present Shock*, London: Current, 2013.

Douglas Rushkoff, *Program or be Programmed: Ten Commands for a Digital
Age*, New York: OR Books, 2010.

Legacy Russell, *Glitch Feminism*, New York: Verso, 2020.

Natasha Stagg, *Sleeveless*, Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2019.

Ocean Vuong, *On Earth We*’*re Briefly Gorgeous*, New York: Penguin
Press, 2019.

McKenzie Wark, *A Hacker*’*s Manifesto*, The Anarchist Library, 2013.

Gerald Weinberg, *The Psychology of Computer Programming,* New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1971.

Elizabeth Wurtzel, *Bitch*, London: Quartet Books Limited, 1999.

\*SONGS\*

Donna Ares, ‘Prokleta je Amerika’, 2012.

Lisa Loeb, ‘She’s Falling Apart’, 2002.

\*ARTICLES\*

Silvio Lorusso, ‘Learn to Code vs. Code to Learn: Creative Coding Beyond
the Economic Imperative’, *Graphic Design in the Post-Digital Age*,
2022,
[*https://silviolorusso.com/publication/learn-to-code-vs-code-to-learn/*](https://silviolorusso.com/publication/learn-to-code-vs-code-to-learn/).

Venkatesh Rao, ‘Why We Slouch’, *Ribbonfarm: Constructions in Magical
Thinking,* December 20, 2018:
[*https://www.ribbonfarm.com/2018/12/20/why-we-slouch/*](https://www.ribbonfarm.com/2018/12/20/why-we-slouch/).

\*MOVING IMAGE\*

Adam Curtis, ‘All Watched Over by the Machine’, Episode \#2: ‘The Use
and Abuse of Vegetational Concepts’, BBC Productions, 2010.

\*WEBS\*

Audrey Tang, [*https://audreyt.org/*](https://audreyt.org/).

A Website Is A Room,
[*https://a-website-is-a-room.net/*](https://a-website-is-a-room.net/).

Cyberfeminism Index,
[*https://cyberfeminismindex.com/*](https://cyberfeminismindex.com/).

How I Experience Web Today,
[*https://how-i-experience-web-today.com/*](https://how-i-experience-web-today.com/).

Minus,
[*https://bengrosser.com/projects/minus/*](https://bengrosser.com/projects/minus/).

Motherfucking Website,
[*https://motherfuckingwebsite.com/*](https://motherfuckingwebsite.com/).

QUEERING THE MAP,
[*https://www.queeringthemap.com/*](https://www.queeringthemap.com/).

\*MAGAZINES\*

*Real Review\#11*, ‘What it Means to Live Today’, London: REAL
Foundation, Spring 2021.

